The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Works of John Dryden, now first
collected in eighteen volumes. Volume 14, by John Dryden

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Works of John Dryden, now first collected in eighteen
       volumes. Volume 14

Author: John Dryden

Release Date: January 19, 2021 [eBook #64337]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Jonathan Ingram, Matthias Grammel and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF JOHN DRYDEN, NOW
FIRST COLLECTED IN EIGHTEEN VOLUMES. VOLUME 14 ***




                      THE

                     WORKS

                      OF

                  JOHN DRYDEN,

              NOW FIRST COLLECTED

             _IN EIGHTEEN VOLUMES_.

                  ILLUSTRATED

                  WITH NOTES,

     HISTORICAL, CRITICAL, AND EXPLANATORY,

                      AND

             A LIFE OF THE AUTHOR,

                      BY

              WALTER SCOTT, ESQ.

                   VOL. XIV.

                    LONDON:

  PRINTED FOR WILLIAM MILLER, ALBEMARLE STREET

     BY JAMES BALLANTYNE AND CO. EDINBURGH.

                     1808.




CONTENTS OF VOLUME FOURTEENTH.


                                                    PAGE.

  The Georgics, translated from Virgil                 1

      Dedication to the Earl of Chesterfield           3

      An Essay on the Georgics, by Mr Addison         14

      Book I.                                         27

      Book II.                                        49

      Book III.                                       73

      Book IV.                                        98

      Notes on Book IV.                              123

  Æneis                                              125

      Dedication to the Marquis of Normanby,
        Earl of Mulgrave, &c.                        127

      Book I.                                        231

      Notes on Book I.                               262

      Book II.                                       264

      Book III.                                      296

      Notes on Book III.                             323

      Book IV.                                       324

      Note on Book IV.                               353

      Book V.                                        355

      Book VI.                                       388

      Notes on Book VI.                              424

      Book VII.                                      429

      Notes on Book VII.                             461




THE GEORGICS.




TO

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE

PHILIP,

EARL OF CHESTERFIELD, &c.[1]


  MY LORD,

I cannot begin my address to your lordship better than in the words of
Virgil:

  ----_Quod optanti divûm promittere nemo
  Auderet, volvenda dies, en, attulit ultro._

Seven years together I have concealed the longing which I had to appear
before you: a time as tedious as Æneas passed in his wandering voyage,
before he reached the promised Italy. But I considered, that nothing
which my meanness could produce, was worthy of your patronage. At
last this happy occasion offered, of presenting to you the best poem
of the best poet. If I balked this opportunity, I was in despair of
finding such another; and, if I took it, I was still uncertain whether
you would vouchsafe to accept it from my hands. It was a bold venture
which I made, in desiring your permission to lay my unworthy labours
at your feet. But my rashness has succeeded beyond my hopes; and you
have been pleased not to suffer an old man to go discontented out of
the world, for want of that protection, of which he had been so long
ambitious. I have known a gentleman in disgrace, and not daring to
appear before King Charles the Second, though he much desired it: at
length he took the confidence to attend a fair lady to the court, and
told his majesty, that, under her protection, he had presumed to wait
on him. With the same humble confidence, I present myself before your
lordship, and, attending on Virgil, hope a gracious reception. The
gentleman succeeded, because the powerful lady was his friend; but I
have too much injured my great author, to expect he should intercede
for me. I would have translated him; but, according to the literal
French and Italian phrases, I fear I have _traduced_ him. It is the
fault of many a well-meaning man, to be officious in a wrong place,
and do a prejudice where he had endeavoured to do a service. Virgil
wrote his Georgics in the full strength and vigour of his age, when his
judgment was at the height, and before his fancy was declining. He had
(according to our homely saying) his full swing at this poem, beginning
it about the age of thirty-five, and scarce concluding it before he
arrived at forty. It is observed, both of him and Horace, (and I
believe it will hold in all great poets,) that, though they wrote
before with a certain heat of genius which inspired them, yet that heat
was not perfectly digested. There is required a continuance of warmth,
to ripen the best and noblest fruits. Thus Horace, in his First and
Second Book of Odes, was still rising, but came not to his meridian
till the Third; after which, his judgment was an overpoise to his
imagination: he grew too cautious to be bold enough; for he descended
in his Fourth by slow degrees, and, in his Satires and Epistles,
was more a philosopher and a critic than a poet. In the beginning
of summer, the days are almost at a stand, with little variation of
length or shortness, because at that time the diurnal motion of the
sun partakes more of a right line than of a spiral. The same is the
method of nature in the frame of man. He seems at forty to be fully in
his summer tropic; somewhat before, and somewhat after, he finds in
his soul but small increases or decays. From fifty to three score, the
balance generally holds even, in our colder climates: for he loses not
much in fancy; and judgement, which is the effect of observation, still
increases. His succeeding years afford him little more than the stubble
of his own harvest: yet, if his constitution be healthful, his mind
may still retain a decent vigour; and the gleanings of that Ephraim,
in comparison with others, will surpass the vintage of Abiezer. I have
called this somewhere, by a bold metaphor, a green old age; but Virgil
has given me his authority for the figure--

  _Jam senior; sed cruda Deo, viridisque senectus._

Among those few who enjoy the advantage of a latter spring, your
lordship is a rare example; who, being now arrived at your great
climacteric, yet give no proof of the least decay of your excellent
judgment and comprehension of all things which are within the compass
of human understanding. Your conversation is as easy as it is
instructive; and I could never observe the least vanity, or the least
assuming, in any thing you said, but a natural unaffected modesty, full
of good sense, and well digested; a clearness of notion, expressed
in ready and unstudied words. No man has complained, or even can,
that you have discoursed too long on any subject; for you leave us
in an eagerness of learning more; pleased with what we hear, but not
satisfied, because you will not speak so much as we could wish. I dare
not excuse your lordship from this fault; for, though it is none in
you, it is one to all who have the happiness of being known to you.
I must confess, the critics make it one of Virgil's beauties, that,
having said what he thought convenient, he always left somewhat for the
imagination of his readers to supply; that they might gratify their
fancies, by finding more in what he had written, than at first they
could; and think they had added to his thought, when it was all there
before-hand, and he only saved himself the expence of words. However
it was, I never went from your lordship, but with a longing to return,
or without a hearty curse to him who invented ceremonies in the world,
and put me on the necessity of withdrawing, when it was my interest, as
well as my desire, to have given you a much longer trouble. I cannot
imagine, (if your lordship will give me leave to speak my thoughts,)
but you have had a more than ordinary vigour in your youth; for too
much of heat is required at first, that there may not too little be
left at last. A prodigal fire is only capable of large remains; and
yours, my lord, still burns the clearer in declining. The blaze is
not so fierce as at the first; but the smoke is wholly vanished; and
your friends, who stand about you, are not only sensible of a cheerful
warmth, but are kept at an awful distance by its force. In my small
observations of mankind, I have ever found, that such as are not rather
too full of spirit when they are young, degenerate to dulness in their
age. Sobriety in our riper years is the effect of a well-concocted
warmth: but, where the principles are only phlegm, what can be expected
from the waterish matter, but an insipid manhood, and a stupid old
infancy--discretion in leading-strings, and a confirmed ignorance on
crutches? Virgil, in his Third Georgic, when he describes a colt, who
promises a courser for the race, or for the field of battle, shews him
the first to pass the bridge, which trembles under him, and to stem
the torrent of the flood. His beginnings must be in rashness--a noble
fault: but time and experience will correct that error, and tame it
into a deliberate and well-weighed courage, which knows both to be
cautious and to dare, as occasion offers. Your lordship is a man of
honour, not only so unstained, but so unquestioned, that you are the
living standard of that heroic virtue; so truly such, that if I would
flatter you, I could not. It takes not from you, that you were born
with principles of generosity and probity; but it adds to you, that you
have cultivated nature, and made those principles the rule and measure
of all your actions. The world knows this, without my telling; yet
poets have a right of recording it to all posterity:

  _Dignum laude virum Musa vetat mori._

Epaminondas, Lucullus, and the two first Cæsars, were not esteemed the
worse commanders, for having made philosophy and the liberal arts
their study. Cicero might have been their equal, but that he wanted
courage. To have both these virtues, and to have improved them both
with a softness of manners and a sweetness of conversation--few of our
nobility can fill that character. One there is, and so conspicuous by
his own light, that he needs not

  _Digito monstrari, et dicier, "Hic est!"_

To be nobly born, and of an ancient family, is in the extremes of
fortune, either good or bad; for virtue and descent are no inheritance.
A long series of ancestors shews the native with great advantage at
the first; but, if he any way degenerate from his line, the least spot
is visible on ermine. But, to preserve this whiteness in its original
purity, you, my lord, have, like that ermine, forsaken the common
tract of business, which is not always clean: you have chosen for
yourself a private greatness, and will not be polluted with ambition.
It has been observed in former times, that none have been so greedy
of employments, and of managing the public, as they who have least
deserved their stations. But such only merit to be called patriots,
under whom we see their country flourish. I have laughed sometimes,
(for who would always be a Heraclitus?) when I have reflected on those
men, who from time to time have shot themselves into the world. I have
seen many successions of them; some bolting out upon the stage with
vast applause, and others hissed off, and quitting it with disgrace.
But, while they were in action, I have constantly observed, that they
seemed desirous to retreat from business; greatness, they said, was
nauseous, and a crowd was troublesome: a quiet privacy was their
ambition. Some few of them, I believe, said this in earnest, and were
making a provision against future want, that they might enjoy their
age with ease. They saw the happiness of a private life, and promised
to themselves a blessing, which every day it was in their power to
possess. But they deferred it, and lingered still at court, because
they thought they had not yet enough to make them happy: they would
have more, and laid in, to make their solitude luxurious:--a wretched
philosophy, which Epicurus never taught them in his garden. They loved
the prospect of this quiet in reversion, but were not willing to have
it in possession: they would first be old, and make as sure of health
and life, as if both of them were at their dispose. But put them to
the necessity of a present choice, and they preferred continuance
in power; like the wretch who called Death to his assistance, but
refused him when he came. The great Scipio was not of their opinion,
who indeed sought honours in his youth, and endured the fatigues with
which he purchased them. He served his country when it was in need of
his courage and conduct, till he thought it was time to serve himself;
but dismounted from the saddle when he found the beast which bore him
began to grow restiff and ungovernable. But your lordship has given us
a better example of moderation. You saw betimes, that ingratitude is
not confined to commonwealths; and therefore, though you were formed
alike for the greatest of civil employments and military commands, yet
you pushed not your fortune to rise in either, but contented yourself
with being capable, as much as any whosoever of defending your country
with your sword, or assisting it with your counsel, when you were
called.[2] For the rest, the respect and love which was paid you, not
only in the province where you live, but generally by all who had the
happiness to know you, was a wise exchange for the honours of the
court--a place of forgetfulness, at the best, for well-deservers. It
is necessary, for the polishing of manners, to have breathed that air;
but it is infectious, even to the best morals, to live always in it.
It is a dangerous commerce, where an honest man is sure at the first
of being cheated, and he recovers not his loses, but by learning to
cheat others. The undermining smile becomes at length habitual; and the
drift of his plausible conversation is only to flatter one, that he
may betray another. Yet it is good to have been a looker on, without
venturing to play; that a man may know false dice another time, though
he never means to use them. I commend not him who never knew a court,
but him who forsakes it because he knows it. A young man deserves
no praise, who, out of melancholy zeal, leaves the world before he
has well tried it, and runs headlong into religion. He who carries a
maidenhead into a cloister, is sometimes apt to lose it there, and to
repent of his repentance. He only is like to endure austerities, who
has already found the inconvenience of pleasures: for almost every man
will be making experiments in one part or another of his life; and the
danger is the less when we are young; for, having tried it early, we
shall not be apt to repeat it afterwards. Your lordship therefore may
properly be said to have chosen a retreat, and not to have chosen it
till you had maturely weighed the advantages of rising higher, with the
hazards of the fall.

  _Res, non parta labore, sed relicta,_

was thought by a poet to be one of the requisites to a happy life.
Why should a reasonable man put it into the power of Fortune to make
him miserable, when his ancestors have taken care to release him from
her? Let him venture, says Horace, _qui zonam perdidit_. He, who has
nothing, plays securely; for he may win, and cannot be poorer if he
loses: but he who is born to a plentiful estate, and is ambitious of
offices at court, sets a stake to Fortune, which she can seldom answer.
If he gains nothing, he loses all, or part of what was once his own;
and, if he gets, he cannot be certain but he may refund. In short,
however he succeeds, it is covetousness that induced him first to play;
and covetousness is the undoubted sign of ill sense at bottom. The odds
are against him, that he loses; and one loss may be of more consequence
to him than all his former winnings. It is like the present war of
the Christians against the Turk: every year they gain a victory, and
by that a town; but, if they are once defeated, they lose a province
at a blow, and endanger the safety of the whole empire. You, my lord,
enjoy your quiet in a garden, where you have not only the leisure of
thinking, but the pleasure to think of nothing which can discompose
your mind. A good conscience is a port which is land-locked on every
side, and where no winds can possibly invade, no tempests can arise.
There a man may stand upon the shore, and not only see his own image,
but that of his Maker, clearly reflected from the undisturbed and
silent waters. Reason was intended for a blessing; and such it is to
men of honour and integrity, who desire no more than what they are
able to give themselves; like the happy old Corycian, whom my author
describes in his Fourth Georgic, whose fruits and sallads, on which he
lived contented, were all of his own growth, and his own plantation.
Virgil seems to think, that the blessings of a country-life are not
complete without an improvement of knowledge by contemplation and
reading:

  _O fortunatos nimium, sua si bona nôrint,
  Agricolas!_

It is but half possession, not to understand that happiness which we
possess. A foundation of good sense, and a cultivation of learning,
are required to give a seasoning to retirement, and make us taste
the blessing. God has bestowed on your lordship the first of these;
and you have bestowed on yourself the second. Eden was not made for
beasts, though they were suffered to live in it, but for their master,
who studied God in the works of his creation. Neither could the devil
have been happy there with all his knowledge; for he wanted innocence
to make him so. He brought envy, malice, and ambition, into Paradise,
which soured to him the sweetness of the place. Wherever inordinate
affections are, 'tis hell. Such only can enjoy the country, who are
capable of thinking when they are there, and have left their passions
behind them in the town. Then they are prepared for solitude; and, in
that solitude, is prepared for them,

  _Et secura quies, et nescia fallere vita._

As I began this Dedication with a verse of Virgil, so I conclude it
with another.

The continuance of your health, to enjoy that happiness which you so
well deserve, and which you have provided for yourself, is the sincere
and earnest wish of

  Your lordship's
    Most devoted
      And most obedient servant,
                 JOHN DRYDEN.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Philip Stanhope, second Earl of Chesterfield, born in
1634. He was a man of considerable talent and political activity; was
active in forwarding the Restoration; and enjoyed at the court of
Charles II. several offices, but was now retired. He died in 1713.

[2] Dryden's praise, though often hyperbolical, is always
founded on some circumstances appropriate to its object. Lord
Chesterfield, who had enjoyed offices of honour at the court of Charles
II., now lived in retirement at an elegant villa, according to Mr
Malone, near Twickenham.




AN ESSAY ON THE GEORGICS.

BY MR ADDISON.[3]


Virgil may be reckoned the first who introduced three new kinds of
poetry among the Romans, which he copied after three the greatest
masters of Greece. Theocritus and Homer have still disputed for the
advantage over him in Pastoral and Heroics; but I think all are
unanimous in giving him the precedence to Hesiod in his "Georgics."
The truth of it is, the sweetness and rusticity of a Pastoral cannot
be so well expressed in any other tongue as in the Greek, when rightly
mixed and qualified with the Doric dialect; nor can the majesty of a
Heroic poem anywhere appear so well as in this language, which has
a natural greatness in it, and can he often rendered more deep and
sonorous by the pronunciation of the Ionians. But, in the middle style,
where the writers in both tongues are on a level, we see how far Virgil
has excelled all who have written in the same way with him.

There has been abundance of criticism spent on Virgil's "Pastorals" and
"Æneïs:" but the "Georgics" are a subject which none of the critics
have sufficiently taken into their consideration; most of them passing
it over in silence, or casting it under the same head with pastoral:
a division by no means proper, unless we suppose the style of a
husbandman ought to be imitated in a Georgic, as that of a shepherd is
in a Pastoral. But, though the scene of both these poems lies in the
same place, the speakers in them are of a quite different character,
since the precepts of husbandry are not to be delivered with the
simplicity of a ploughman, but with the address of a poet. No rules,
therefore, that relate to pastoral, can any way affect the Georgics,
which fall under that class of poetry which consists in giving plain
and direct instructions to the reader; whether they be moral duties,
as those of Theognis and Pythagoras, or philosophical speculations, as
those of Aratus and Lucretius, or rules of practice, as those of Hesiod
and Virgil. Among these different kinds of subjects, that which the
Georgic goes upon, is, I think, the meanest and least improving, but
the most pleasing and delightful. Precepts of morality, besides the
natural corruption of our tempers, which makes us averse to them, are
so abstracted from ideas of sense, that they seldom give an opportunity
for those beautiful descriptions and images which are the spirit and
life of poetry. Natural philosophy has indeed sensible objects to
work upon; but then it often puzzles the reader with the intricacy
of its notion, and perplexes him with the multitude of its disputes.
But this kind of poetry I am now speaking of, addresses itself wholly
to the imagination: it is altogether conversant among the fields and
woods, and has the most delightful part of nature for its province.
It raises in our minds a pleasing variety of scenes and landscapes,
whilst it teaches us, and makes the driest of its precepts look like
a description. _A Georgic therefore is some part of the science of
husbandry put into a pleasing dress, and set off with all the beauties
and embellishments of poetry._ Now, since this science of husbandry
is of a very large extent, the poet shows his skill in singling out
such precepts to proceed on, as are useful, and at the same time most
capable of ornament. Virgil was so well acquainted with this secret,
that, to set off his Georgic, he has run into a set of precepts, which
are almost foreign to his subject, in that beautiful account he gives
us of the signs in nature, which precede the changes of the weather.

And, if there be so much art in the choice of fit precepts, there is
much more required in the treating of them, that they may fall in after
each other by a natural unforced method, and show themselves in the
best and most advantageous light. They should all be so finely wrought
together in the same piece, that no coarse seam may discover where they
join; as, in a curious brede of needle-work, one colour falls away by
such just degrees, and another rises so insensibly, that we see the
variety, without being able to distinguish the total vanishing of the
one from the first appearance of the other. Nor is it sufficient to
range and dispose this body of precepts into a clear and easy method,
unless they are delivered to us in the most pleasing and agreeable
manner: for there are several ways of conveying the same truth to the
mind of man; and to chuse the pleasantest of these ways, is that which
chiefly distinguishes poetry from prose, and makes Virgil's rules of
husbandry pleasanter to read than Varro's. Where the prose-writer tells
us plainly what ought to be done, the poet often conceals the precept
in a description, and represents his countryman performing the action
in which he would instruct his reader. Where the one sets out, as fully
and distinctly as he can, all the parts of the truth which he would
communicate to us, the other singles out the most pleasing circumstance
of this truth, and so conveys the whole in a more diverting manner to
the understanding. I shall give one instance, out of a multitude of
this nature, that might be found in the Georgics, where the reader may
see the different ways Virgil has taken to express the same thing, and
how much pleasanter every manner of expression is, than the plain and
direct mention of it would have been. It is in the Second Georgic,
where he tells us what trees will bear grafting on each other:

  _Et sæpe alterius ramos impune videmus
  Vertere in alterius, mutatamque insita mala
  Ferre pyrum, et prunis lapidosa rubescere corna.
  --Steriles platani malos gessere valentes:
  Castaneæ fagus, ornusque incanuit albo
  Flore pyri; glandemque sues fregere sub ulmis.
  ----Nec longum tempus; et ingens
  Exiit ad cælum ramis felicibus arbos;
  Miraturque novas frondes, et non sua poma._

Here, we see, the poet considered all the effects of this union between
trees of different kinds, and took notice of that effect which had the
most surprise, and by consequence the most delight in it, to express
the capacity that was in them of being thus united. This way of writing
is every where much in use among the poets, and is particularly
practised by Virgil, who loves to suggest a truth indirectly, and,
without giving us a full and open view of it, to let us see just so
much as will naturally lead the imagination into all the parts that lie
concealed. This is wonderfully diverting to the understanding, thus to
receive a precept, that enters, as it were, through a by-way, and to
apprehend an idea that draws a whole train after it. For here the mind,
which is always delighted with its own discoveries, only takes the hint
from the poet, and seems to work out the rest by the strength of her
own faculties.

But, since the inculcating precept upon precept will at length prove
tiresome to the reader, if he meets with no entertainment,--the poet
must take care not to encumber his poem with too much business, but
sometimes to relieve the subject with a moral reflection, or let it
rest a while for the sake of a pleasant and pertinent digression. Nor
is it sufficient to run out into beautiful and diverting digressions,
(as it is generally thought,) unless they are brought in aptly, and
are something of a piece with the main design of the Georgic: for
they ought to have a remote alliance at least to the subject, that so
the whole poem may be more uniform and agreeable in all its parts. We
should never quite lose sight of the country, though we are sometimes
entertained with a distant prospect of it. Of this nature are Virgil's
descriptions of the original of agriculture, of the fruitfulness of
Italy, of a country life, and the like, which are not brought in by
force, but naturally rise out of the principal argument and design of
the poem. I know no one digression in the Georgics that may seem to
contradict this observation, besides that in the latter end of the
first book, where the poet launches out into a discourse of the battle
of Pharsalia, and the actions of Augustus: but it is worth while to
consider how admirably he has turned the course of his narration into
its proper channel, and made his husbandman concerned even in what
relates to the battle, in those inimitable lines:

  _Scilicet et tempus veniet, cum finibus illis
  Agricola, incurvo terram molitus aratro,
  Exesa inveniet scabrâ rubigine pila,
  Aut gravibus rastris galeas pulsabit inanes,
  Grandiaque effossis mirabitur ossa sepulcris._

And afterwards, speaking of Augustus's actions, he still remembers,
that agriculture ought to be some way hinted at throughout the whole
poem:

  ----_Non ullus aratro
  Dignus honos: squalent abductis arva colonis;
  Et curvæ rigidum falces conflantur in ensem._

We now come to the style which is proper to a Georgic; and indeed this
is the part on which the poet must lay out all his strength, that his
words may be warm and glowing, and that every thing he describes may
immediately present itself, and rise up to the reader's view. He ought,
in particular, to be careful of not letting his subject debase his
style, and betray him into a meanness of expression, but every where to
keep up his verse in all the pomp of numbers, and dignity of words.

I think nothing, which is a phrase or saying in common talk, should be
admitted into a serious poem; because it takes off from the solemnity
of the expression, and gives it too great a turn of familiarity. Much
less ought the low phrases and terms of art, that are adapted to
husbandry, have any place in such a work as the Georgic, which is not
to appear in the natural simplicity and nakedness of its subject, but
in the pleasantest dress that poetry can bestow on it. Thus Virgil, to
deviate from the common form of words, would not make use of _tempore_,
but _sidere_, in his first verse, and every where else abounds with
metaphors, Grecisms, and circumlocutions, to give his verse the greater
pomp, and preserve it from sinking into a plebeian style. And herein
consists Virgil's master-piece, who has not only excelled all other
poets, but even himself, in the language of his Georgics, where we
receive more strong and lively ideas of things from his words, than we
could have done from the objects themselves; and find our imaginations
more affected by his descriptions, than they would have been by the
very sight of what he describes.

I shall now, after this short scheme of rules, consider the different
success that Hesiod and Virgil have met with in this kind of poetry,
which may give us some further notion of the excellence of the
Georgics. To begin with Hesiod:--If we may guess at his character from
his writings, he had much more of the husbandman than the poet in
his temper: he was wonderfully grave, discreet, and frugal: he lived
altogether in the country, and was probably, for his great prudence,
the oracle of the neighbourhood.--These principles of good husbandry
ran through his works, and directed him to the choice of tillage and
merchandize, for the subject of that which is the most celebrated of
them. He is every where bent on instruction, avoids all manner of
digressions, and does not stir out of the field once in the whole
Georgic. His method, in describing month after month, with its proper
seasons and employments, is too grave and simple; it takes off from the
surprise and variety of the poem, and makes the whole look but like a
modern almanack in verse. The reader is carried through a course of
weather, and may beforehand guess whether he is to meet with snow or
rain, clouds or sunshine, in the next description. His descriptions,
indeed, have abundance of nature in them; but then it is nature in her
simplicity and undress. Thus, when he speaks of January,--"The wild
beasts," says he, "run shivering through the woods, with their heads
stooping to the ground, and their tails clapt between their legs; the
goats and oxen are almost flayed with cold: but it is not so bad with
the sheep, because they have a thick coat of wool about them. The old
men too are bitterly pinched with the weather: but the young girls feel
nothing of it, who sit at home with their mothers by a warm fire-side."
Thus does the old gentleman give himself up to a loose kind of tattle
rather than endeavour after a just poetical description. Nor has he
shown more of art or judgment in the precepts he has given us, which
are sown so very thick, that they clog the poem too much, and are
often so minute and full of circumstances, that they weaken and unnerve
his verse. But, after all, we are beholden to him for the first rough
sketch of a Georgic; where we may still discover something venerable in
the antiqueness of the work: but, if we would see the design enlarged,
the figures reformed, the colouring laid on, and the whole piece
finished, we must expect it from a greater master's hand.

Virgil has drawn out the rules of tillage and planting into two books,
which Hesiod has dispatched in half a one; but has so raised the
natural rudeness and simplicity of his subject with such a significancy
of expression, such a pomp of verse, such variety of transitions, and
such a solemn air in his reflections, that, if we look on both poets
together, we see in one the plainness of a downright countryman, and,
in the other, something of a rustic majesty, like that of a Roman
dictator at the plough-tail. He delivers the meanest of his precepts
with a kind of grandeur: he breaks the clods, and tosses the dung
about, with an air of gracefulness. His prognostications of the weather
are taken out of Aratus, where we may see how judiciously he has picked
out those that are most proper for his husbandman's observation; how he
has enforced the expression, and heightened the images, which he found
in the original.

The Second Book has more wit in it, and a greater boldness in its
metaphors, than any of the rest. The poet, with a great beauty, applies
oblivion, ignorance, wonder, desire, and the like, to his trees.--The
last Georgic has, indeed, as many metaphors, but not so daring as this;
for human thoughts and passions may be more naturally ascribed to a
bee, than to an inanimate plant. He who reads over the pleasures of a
country life, as they are described by Virgil in the latter end of
this book, can scarce be of Virgil's mind in preferring even the life
of a philosopher to it.

We may, I think, read the poet's clime in his description; for he seems
to have been in a sweat at the writing of it:

  ----_O! qui me gelidis in vallibus Hæmi
  Sistat, et ingenti ramorum protegat umbrâ!_--

and is every where mentioning, among his chief pleasures, the coolness
of his shades and rivers, vales and grottoes, which a more northern
poet would have omitted for the description of a sunny hill, and
fire-side.

The Third Georgic seems to be the most laboured of them all: there
is a wonderful vigour and spirit in the description of the horse and
chariot-race. The force of love is represented in noble instances, and
very sublime expressions. The Scythian winter-piece appears so very
cold and bleak to the eye, that a man can scarce look on it without
shivering. The murrain, at the end, has all the expressiveness that
words can give. It was here that the poet strained hard to out-do
Lucretius in the description of his plague: and, if the reader would
see what success he had, he may find it at large in Scaliger.

But Virgil seems no where so well pleased, as when he is got among his
Bees in the Fourth Georgic; and ennobles the actions of so trivial a
creature, with metaphors drawn from the most important concerns of
mankind. His verses are not in a greater noise and hurry in the battles
of Æneas and Turnus, than in the engagement of two swarms. And as, in
his Æneïs, he compares the labours of his Trojans to those of bees and
pismires, here he compares the labours of the bees to those of the
Cyclops. In short, the last Georgic was a good prelude to the Æneïs,
and very well showed what the poet could do in the description of what
was really great, by his describing the mock grandeur of an insect with
so good a grace. There is more pleasantness in the little platform of
a garden, which he gives us about the middle of this book, than in all
the spacious walks and water-works of Rapin. The speech of Proteus,
at the end, can never be enough admired, and was indeed very fit to
conclude so divine a work.

After this particular account of the beauties in the Georgics, I
should, in the next place, endeavour to point out its imperfections,
if it has any. But, though I think there are some few parts in it that
are not so beautiful as the rest, I shall not presume to name them,
as rather suspecting my own judgement, than I can believe a fault to
be in that poem, which lay so long under Virgil's correction, and had
his last hand put to it. The First Georgic was probably burlesqued in
the author's life-time; for we still find in the scholiasts a verse
that ridicules part of a line translated from Hesiod--_Nudus ara, sere
nudus_: And we may easily guess at the judgment of this extraordinary
critic, whoever he was, from his censuring this particular precept.
We may be sure Virgil would not have translated it from Hesiod, had
he not discovered some beauty in it; and indeed the beauty of it is,
what I have before observed to be frequently met with in Virgil, the
delivering the precept so indirectly, and singling out the particular
circumstance of sowing and ploughing naked, to suggest to us, that
these employments are proper only in the hot season of the year.

I shall not here compare the style of the Georgics with that of
Lucretius, (which the reader may see already done in the preface to the
second volume of Miscellany Poems,) but shall conclude this poem to be
the most complete, elaborate, and finished piece of all antiquity. The
Æneïs, indeed, is of a nobler kind; but the Georgic is more perfect in
its kind. The Æneïs has a greater variety of beauties in it; but those
of the Georgic are more exquisite. In short, the Georgic has all the
perfection that can be expected in a poem written by the greatest poet
in the flower of his age, when his invention was ready, his imagination
warm, his judgment settled, and all his faculties in their full vigour
and maturity.


FOOTNOTES:

[3] Addison had already distinguished himself as a man of
letters, and as an admirer of Dryden, by a copy of verses addressed to
our author, and by a translation of the Fourth Book of the Georgics,
exclusive of the story of Aristæus. This last performance is liberally
commended by Dryden in the Postscript to Virgil. The following Essay,
which has been much admired for judicious criticism contained in
elegant language, was sent by him to our author, but without permission
to prefix the writer's name. This circumstance led Tickell to throw
some reflection on Dryden, as if he had meant to assume to himself
the merit of the composition. This charge was refuted by Steele, in
a letter to Congreve, prefixed to an edition of the comedy of "The
Drummer," in 1722, who proves, that the Essay was the same paper which
Dryden calls the Preface to the Georgics, and which he acknowledges to
have been sent by a friend, whose name he was not at liberty to make
public. See the article _Addison_ in the "Biographia Britannica."




GEORGICS.




BOOK I.

ARGUMENT.

 _The poet, in the beginning of this book, propounds the general
 design of each Georgic: and, after a solemn invocation of all the
 gods, who are any way related to his subject, he addresses himself,
 in particular, to Augustus, whom he compliments with divinity; and,
 after, strikes into his business. He shows the different kinds
 of tillage proper to different soils; traces out the original of
 agriculture; gives a catalogue of the husbandman's tools; specifies
 the employments peculiar to each season; describes the changes of
 the weather, with the signs in heaven and earth that forbode them;
 instances many of the prodigies that happened near the time of Julius
 Cæsar's death; and shuts up all with a supplication to the gods for
 the safety of Augustus, and the preservation of Rome._[4]


  What makes a plenteous harvest, when to turn
  The fruitful soil, and when to sow the corn;
  The care of sheep, of oxen, and of kine,
  And how to raise on elms the teeming vine;
  The birth and genius of the frugal Bee,
  I sing, Mæcenas, and I sing to thee.
    Ye deities! who fields and plains protect,
  Who rule the seasons, and the year direct,
  Bacchus and fostering Ceres, powers divine,
  Who gave us corn for mast, for water, wine--
  Ye Fauns, propitious to the rural swains,
  Ye Nymphs, that haunt the mountains and the plains,
  Join in my work, and to my numbers bring
  Your needful succour; for your gifts I sing.
  And thou, whose trident struck the teeming earth,
  And made a passage for the courser's birth;
  And thou, for whom the Cæan shore sustains
  The milky herds, that graze the flowery plains;
  And thou, the shepherds' tutelary god,
  Leave, for a while, O Pan! thy loved abode;
  And, if Arcadian fleeces be thy care,
  From fields and mountains to my song repair.
  Inventor, Pallas, of the fattening oil,
  Thou founder of the plough, and ploughman's toil;
  And thou, whose hands the shrowd-like cypress rear,         }
  Come, all ye gods and goddesses, that wear                  }
  The rural honours, and increase the year;                   }
  You, who supply the ground with seeds of grain;
  And you, who swell those seeds with kindly rain;
  And chiefly thou, whose undetermined state
  Is yet the business of the gods' debate,
  Whether in after times to be declared
  The patron of the world, and Rome's peculiar guard,
  Or o'er the fruits and seasons to preside,
  And the round circuit of the year to guide--
  Powerful of blessings, which thou strew'st around,
  And with thy goddess mother's myrtle crowned.
  Or wilt thou, Cæsar, chuse the watery reign,
  To smooth the surges, and correct the main?
  Then mariners, in storms, to thee shall pray;               }
  Even utmost Thule shall thy power obey;                     }
  And Neptune shall resign the fasces of the sea.             }
  The watery virgins for thy bed shall strive,
  And Tethys all her waves in dowry give.
  Or wilt thou bless our summers with thy ray
  And, seated near the Balance, poise the days,
  Where, in the void of heaven, a space is free,
  Betwixt the Scorpion and the Maid, for thee?
  The Scorpion, ready to receive thy laws,
  Yields half his region, and contracts his claws.
  Whatever part of heaven thou shalt obtain,
  (For let not hell presume of such a reign;
  Nor let so dire a thirst of empire move
  Thy mind, to leave thy kindred gods above;
  Though Greece admires Elysium's blest retreat,
  Though Proserpine affects her silent seat,
  And, importuned by Ceres to remove,
  Prefers the fields below to those above),
  Be thou propitious, Cæsar! guide my course,
  And to my bold endeavours add thy force:
  Pity the poet's and the ploughman's cares;                  }
  Interest thy greatness in our mean affairs,                 }
  And use thyself betimes to hear and grant our prayers.      }
    While yet the spring is young, while earth unbinds
  Her frozen bosom to the western winds;
  While mountain snows dissolve against the sun,
  And streams, yet new, from precipices run;
  Even in this early dawning of the year,
  Produce the plough, and yoke the sturdy steer,
  And goad him till he groans beneath his toil,
  Till the bright share is buried in the soil.
  That crop rewards the greedy peasant's pains,               }
  Which twice the sun, and twice the cold sustains,           }
  And bursts the crowded barns with more than promised gains. }
  But, ere we stir the yet unbroken ground,
  The various course of seasons must be found;
  The weather, and the setting of the winds,
  The culture suiting to the several kinds
  Of seeds and plants, and what will thrive and rise,
  And what the genius of the soil denies.
  This ground with Bacchus, that with Ceres, suits:
  That other loads the trees with happy fruits:
  A fourth, with grass unbidden, decks the ground.
  Thus Tmolus is with yellow saffron crowned:
  India black ebon and white ivory bears;
  And soft Idume weeps her odorous tears
  Thus Pontus sends her beaver-stones from far;
  And naked Spaniards temper steel for war:
  Epirus, for the Elean chariot, breeds
  (In hopes of palms) a race of running steeds.
  This is th' original contract; these the laws
  Imposed by Nature, and by Nature's cause,
  On sundry places, when Deucalion hurled
  His mother's entrails on the desert world;
  Whence men, a hard laborious kind, were born.               }
  Then borrow part of winter for thy corn;                    }
  And early, with thy team, the glebe in furrows turn;        }
  That, while the turf lies open and unbound,
  Succeeding suns may bake the mellow ground.
  But, if the soil be barren, only scar
  The surface, and but lightly print the share,
  When cold Arcturus rises with the sun;
  Lest wicked weeds the corn should over-run
  In watery soils; or lest the barren sand
  Should suck the moisture from the thirsty land.
  Both these unhappy soils the swain forbears,
  And keeps a sabbath of alternate years,
  That the spent earth may gather heart again,
  And, bettered by cessation, bear the grain.
  At least where vetches, pulse, and tares, have stood,
  And stalks of lupines grew, (a stubborn wood,)
  The ensuing season, in return, may bear
  The bearded product of the golden year:[5]
  For flax and oats will burn the tender field,
  And sleepy poppies harmful harvests yield.
  But sweet vicissitudes of rest and toil
  Make easy labour, and renew the soil.
  Yet sprinkle sordid ashes all around,
  And load with fattening dung thy fallow ground.
  Thus change of seeds for meagre soils is best;
  And earth manured, not idle, though at rest.
    Long practice has a sure improvement found,
  With kindled fires to burn the barren ground,
  When the light stubble, to the flames resigned,
  Is driven along, and crackles in the wind.
  Whether from hence the hollow womb of earth
  Is warmed with secret strength for better birth;
  Or, when the latent vice is cured by fire,
  Redundant humours through the pores expire;
  Or that the warmth distends the chinks, and makes
  New breathings, whence new nourishment she takes;
  Or that the heat the gaping ground constrains,
  New knits the surface, and new strings the veins;
  Lest soaking showers should pierce her secret seat,         }
  Or freezing Boreas chill her genial heat,                   }
  Or scorching suns too violently beat.                       }
    Nor is the profit small the peasant makes,
  Who smooths with harrows, or who pounds with rakes,
  The crumbling clods: nor Ceres from on high
  Regards his labours with a grudging eye;
  Nor his, who ploughs across the furrowed grounds,
  And on the back of earth inflicts new wounds;
  For he, with frequent exercise, commands
  The unwilling soil, and tames the stubborn lands.
    Ye swains, invoke the powers who rule the sky,
  For a moist summer, and a winter dry;
  For winter drought rewards the peasant's pain,
  And broods indulgent on the buried grain.
  Hence Mysia boasts her harvests, and the tops
  Of Gargarus admire their happy crops.
  When first the soil receives the fruitful seed,
  Make no delay, but cover it with speed:
  So fenced from cold, the pliant furrows break,
  Before the surly clod resists the rake;
  And call the floods from high, to rush amain
  With pregnant streams, to swell the teeming grain.
  Then, when the fiery suns too fiercely play,
  And shrivelled herbs on withering stems decay,
  The wary ploughman, on the mountain's brow,
  Undams his watery stores--huge torrents flow,
  And, rattling down the rocks, large moisture yield,
  Tempering the thirsty fever of the field--
  And, lest the stem, too feeble for the freight,
  Should scarce sustain the head's unwieldy weight,
  Sends in his feeding flocks betimes, to invade
  The rising bulk of the luxuriant blade,
  Ere yet the aspiring offspring of the grain
  O'ertops the ridges of the furrowed plain;
  And drains the standing waters, when they yield
  Too large a beverage to the drunken field:
  But most in autumn, and the showery spring,
  When dubious months uncertain weather bring;
  When fountains open, when impetuous rain
  Swells hasty brooks, and pours upon the plain;
  When earth with slime and mud is covered o'er,
  Or hollow places spew their watery store.
  Nor yet the ploughman, nor the labouring steer,
  Sustain alone the hazards of the year:
  But glutton geese, and the Strymonian crane,
  With foreign troops invade the tender grain;
  And towering weeds malignant shadows yield;
  And spreading succory chokes the rising field.
  The sire of gods and men, with hard decrees,
  Forbids our plenty to be bought with ease,
  And wills that mortal men, inured to toil,
  Should exercise, with pains, the grudging soil;
  Himself invented first the shining share,
  And whetted human industry by care;
  Himself did handicrafts and arts ordain,
  Nor suffered sloth to rust his active reign.
  Ere this, no peasant vexed the peaceful ground,
  Which only turfs and greens for altars found:
  No fences parted fields, nor marks nor bounds
  Distinguished acres of litigious grounds;
  But all was common, and the fruitful earth
  Was free to give her unexacted birth.
  Jove added venom to the viper's brood,
  And swelled, with raging storms, the peaceful flood;
  Commissioned hungry wolves t' infest the fold,
  And shook from oaken leaves the liquid gold;
  Removed from human reach the cheerful fire,
  And from the rivers bade the wine retire;
  That studious need might useful arts explore;
  From furrowed fields to reap the foodful store,
  And force the veins of clashing flints t' expire
  The lurking seeds of their celestial fire.
  Then first on seas the hollowed alder swam;
  Then sailors quartered heaven, and found a name
  For every fixed and every wandering star--
  The Pleiads, Hyads, and the Northern Car.
  Then toils for beasts, and lime for birds, were found,
  And deep-mouthed dogs did forest-walks surround;
  And casting-nets were spread in shallow brooks,
  Drags in the deep, and baits were hung on hooks.
  Then saws were toothed, and sounding axes made;
  (For wedges first did yielding wood invade,)
  And various arts in order did succeed,
  (What cannot endless labour, urged by need?)
    First Ceres taught, the ground with grain to sow,
  And armed with iron shares the crooked plough;
  When now Dodonian oaks no more supplied
  Their mast, and trees their forest-fruit denied.
  Soon was his labour doubled to the swain,
  And blasting mildews blackened all his grain:
  Tough thistles choked the fields, and killed the corn,
  And an unthrifty crop of weeds was born:
  Then burs and brambles, an unbidden crew
  Of graceless guests, the unhappy fields subdue;
  And oats unblest, and darnel domineers,
  And shoots its head above the shining ears;
  So that, unless the land with daily care
  Is exercised, and, with an iron war
  Of rakes and harrows, the proud foes expelled,
  And birds with clamours frighted from the field--
  Unless the boughs are lopped that shade the plain,
  And heaven invoked with vows for fruitful rain--
  On others'[6] crops you may with envy look,
  And shake for food the long-abandoned oak.
  Nor must we pass untold what arms they wield,
  Who labour tillage and the furrowed field;
  Without whose aid the ground her corn denies,
  And nothing can be sown, and nothing rise--
  The crooked plough, the share, the towering height
  Of waggons, and the cart's unwieldy weight,
  The sled, the tumbril, hurdles, and the flail,
  The fan of Bacchus, with the flying sail--
  These all must be prepared, if ploughmen hope
  The promised blessing of a bounteous crop.
  Young elms, with early force, in copses bow,
  Fit for the figure of the crooked plough.
  Of eight foot long a fastened beam prepare:                 }
  On either side the head, produce an ear;                    }
  And sink a socket for the shining share.                    }
  Of beech the plough-tail, and the bending yoke,
  Or softer linden hardened in the smoke.
  I could be long in precepts; but I fear
  So mean a subject might offend your ear.
  Delve of convenient depth your thrashing floor:
  With tempered clay then fill and face it o'er;
  And let the weighty roller run the round,
  To smooth the surface of the unequal ground;
  Lest, cracked with summer heats, the flooring flies,
  Or sinks, and through the crannies weeds arise:
  For sundry foes the rural realm surround:
  The field-mouse builds her garner under ground
  For gathered grain: the blind laborious mole
  In winding mazes works her hidden hole:
  In hollow caverns vermin make abode--
  The hissing serpent, and the swelling toad:
  The corn-devouring weasel here abides,
  And the wise ant her wintery store provides.
    Mark well the flowering almonds in the wood:
  If odorous blooms the bearing branches load,
  The glebe will answer to the sylvan reign;
  Great heats will follow, and large crops of grain.
  But, if a wood of leaves o'ershade the tree,
  Such and so barren will thy harvest be:
  In vain the hind shall vex the thrashing-floor;
  For empty chaff and straw will be thy store.
  Some steep their seed, and some in cauldrons boil,
  With vigorous nitre and with lees of oil,
  O'er gentle fires, the exuberant juice to drain,
  And swell the flattering husks with fruitful grain.
  Yet is not the success for years assured,
  Though chosen is the seed, and fully cured,
  Unless the peasant, with his annual pain,
  Renews his choice, and culls the largest grain.
  Thus all below, whether by Nature's curse,
  Or Fate's decree, degenerate still to worse.
  So the boat's brawny crew the current stem,
  And, slow advancing, struggle with the stream:
  But, if they slack their hands, or cease to strive,
  Then down the flood with headlong haste they drive.
    Nor must the ploughman less observe the skies,
  When the Kids, Dragon, and Arcturus, rise,
  Than sailors homeward bent, who cut their way
  Through Helle's stormy straits, and oyster-breeding sea.
  But, when Astræa's balance, hung on high,
  Betwixt the nights and days divides the sky,
  Then yoke your oxen, sow your winter grain,
  Till cold December comes with driving rain.
  Linseed and fruitful poppy bury warm,
  In a dry season, and prevent the storm.
  Sow beans and clover in a rotten soil,
  And millet rising from your annual toil,
  When with his golden horns, in full career,                 }
  The Bull beats down the barriers of the year,               }
  And Argo[7] and the Dog forsake the northern sphere.        }
    But, if your care to wheat alone extend,                 }
  Let Maia with her sisters first descend,                   }
  And the bright Gnossian diadem downward bend,              }
  Before you trust in earth your future hope;
  Or else expect a listless lazy crop.
  Some swains have sown before; but most have found
  A husky harvest from the grudging ground.
  Vile vetches would you sow, or lentils lean,
  The growth of Egypt, or the kidney-bean?
  Begin when the slow waggoner descends;
  Nor cease your sowing till mid-winter ends.
  For this, through twelve bright signs Apollo guides
  The year, and earth in several climes divides.
  Five girdles bind the skies: the torrid zone
  Glows with the passing and repassing sun:
  Far on the right and left, the extremes of heaven
  To frosts and snows and bitter blasts are given:
  Betwixt the midst and these, the gods assigned
  Two habitable seats for human kind,
  And, 'cross their limits, cut a sloping way,
  Which the twelve signs in beauteous order sway.
  Two poles turn round the globe; one seen to rise
  O'er Scythian hills, and one in Libyan skies;
  The first sublime in heaven, the last is whirled
  Below the regions of the nether world.
  Around our pole the spiry Dragon glides,
  And, like a winding stream, the Bears divides--
  The less and greater, who, by Fate's decree,
  Abhor to dive beneath the northern sea.[8]
  There, as they say, perpetual night is found
  In silence brooding on the unhappy ground:
  Or, when Aurora leaves our northern sphere,
  She lights the downward heaven, and rises there;
  And, when on us she breathes the living light,
  Red Vesper kindles there the tapers of the night.
  From hence uncertain seasons we may know,
  And when to reap the grain, and when to sow;
  Or when to fell the furzes; when 'tis meet
  To spread the flying canvas for the fleet.
  Observe what stars arise, or disappear;
  And the four quarters of the rolling year.
  But, when cold weather and continued rain
  The labouring husband in his house restrain,
  Let him forecast his work with timely care,                 }
  Which else is huddled, when the skies are fair:             }
  Then let him mark the sheep, or whet the shining share,     }
  Or hollow trees for boats, or number o'er
  His sacks, or measure his increasing store,
  Or sharpen stakes, or head the forks, or twine
  The sallow twigs to tie the straggling vine;
  Or wicker baskets weave, or air the corn,
  Or grinded grain betwixt two marbles turn.
  No laws, divine or human, can restrain
  From necessary works the labouring swain.
  Even holidays and feasts permission yield
  To float the meadows, or to fence the field,
  To fire the brambles, snare the birds, and steep
  In wholesome water-falls the woolly sheep.
  And oft the drudging ass is driven, with toil,
  To neighbouring towns with apples and with oil;
  Returning, late and loaden, home with gain
  Of bartered pitch, and hand-mills for the grain.
    The lucky days, in each revolving moon,
  For labour chuse: the fifth be sure to shun;
  That gave the Furies and pale Pluto birth,
  And armed, against the skies, the sons of earth.
  With mountains piled on mountains, thrice they strove
  To scale the steepy battlements of Jove;
  And thrice his lightning and red thunder played,
  And their demolished works in ruin laid.
  The seventh is, next the tenth, the best to join
  Young oxen to the yoke, and plant the vine.
  Then, weavers, stretch your stays upon the weft:
  The ninth is good for travel, bad for theft.
  Some works in dead of night are better done,
  Or when the morning dew prevents the sun.
  Parched meads and stubble mow by Phœbe's light,
  Which both require the coolness of the night;
  For moisture then abounds, and pearly rains
  Descend in silence to refresh the plains.
  The wife and husband equally conspire
  To work by night, and rake the winter fire:
  He sharpens torches in the glimmering room;
  She shoots the flying shuttle through the loom,
  Or boils in kettles must of wine, and skims,
  With leaves, the dregs that overflow the brims:
  And, till the watchful cock awakes the day,
  She sings, to drive the tedious hours away.
  But, in warm weather, when the skies are clear,
  By day-light reap the product of the year;
  And in the sun your golden grain display,
  And thrash it out, and winnow it by day.
  Plough naked, swain, and naked sow the land;
  For lazy winter numbs the labouring hand.
  In genial winter, swains enjoy their store,
  Forget their hardships, and recruit for more.
  The farmer to full bowls invites his friends,
  And, what he got with pains, with pleasure spends.
  So sailors, when escaped from stormy seas,
  First crown their vessels, then indulge their ease.
  Yet that's the proper time to thrash the wood
  For mast of oak, your fathers' homely food;
  To gather laurel-berries, and the spoil
  Of bloody myrtles, and to press your oil;
  For stalking cranes to set the guileful snare;
  T'inclose the stags in toils, and hunt the hare;
  With Balearic slings, or Gnossian bow,
  To persecute from far the flying doe,
  Then, when the fleecy skies new clothe the wood,
  And cakes of rustling ice come rolling down the flood.
    Now sing we stormy stars, when autumn weighs              }
  The year, and adds to nights, and shortens days,            }
  And suns declining shine with feeble rays:                  }
  What cares must then attend the toiling swain;             }
  Or when the low'ring spring, with lavish rain,             }
  Beats down the slender stem and bearded grain,             }
  While yet the head is green, or, lightly swelled
  With milky moisture, overlooks the field.
  Even when the farmer, now secure of fear,
  Sends in the swains to spoil the finished year,
  Even while the reaper fills his greedy hands,
  And binds the golden sheaves in brittle bands,
  Oft have I seen a sudden storm arise,
  From all the warring winds that sweep the skies:
  The heavy harvest from the root is torn,
  And whirled aloft the lighter stubble borne:
  With such a force the flying rack is driven,
  And such a winter wears the face of heaven:
  And oft whole sheets descend of sluicy rain,
  Sucked by the spongy clouds from off the main:
  The lofty skies[9] at once come pouring down,
  The promised crop and golden labours drown.
  The dikes are filled; and, with a roaring sound,            }
  The rising rivers float the nether ground,                  }
  And rocks the bellowing voice of boiling seas rebound.      }
  The father of the gods his glory shrouds,
  Involved in tempests, and a night of clouds;
  And, from the middle darkness flashing out,
  By fits he deals his fiery bolts about.
  Earth feels the motions of her angry god;                   }
  Her entrails tremble, and her mountains nod,                }
  And flying beasts in forests seek abode:                    }
  Deep horror seizes every human breast;
  Their pride is humbled, and their fear confessed,
  While he from high his rolling thunder throws,
  And fires the mountains with repeated blows:
  The rocks are from their old foundations rent;
  The winds redouble, and the rains augment:
  The waves on heaps are dashed against the shore;
  And now the woods, and now the billows, roar.
    In fear of this, observe the starry signs,
  Where Saturn houses, and where Hermes joins.
  But first to heaven thy due devotions pay,
  And annual gifts on Ceres' altars lay.
  When winter's rage abates, when cheerful hours
  Awake the spring, and spring awakes the flowers,
  On the green turf thy careless limbs display,
  And celebrate the mighty Mother's day;
  For then the hills with pleasing shades are crowned,
  And sleeps are sweeter on the silken ground:
  With milder beams the sun securely shines;[10]
  Fat are the lambs, and luscious are the wines.
  Let every swain adore her power divine,
  And milk and honey mix with sparkling wine:
  Let all the choir of clowns attend the show,
  In long procession, shouting as they go;
  Invoking her to bless their yearly stores,
  Inviting plenty to their crowded floors.
  Thus in the spring, and thus in summer's heat,
  Before the sickles touch the ripening wheat,
  On Ceres call; and let the labouring hind
  With oaken wreaths his hollow temples bind:
  On Ceres let him call, and Ceres praise,
  With uncouth dances, and with country lays.
    And that by certain signs we may presage
  Of heats and rains, and wind's impetuous rage,
  The Sovereign of the heavens has set on high
  The moon, to mark the changes of the sky;
  When southern blasts should cease, and when the swain
  Should near their folds his feeding flocks restrain.
  For, ere the rising winds begin to roar,
  The working seas advance to wash the shore;
  Soft whispers run along the leafy woods,
  And mountains whistle to the murmuring floods.
  Even then the doubtful billows scarce abstain
  From the tossed vessel on the troubled main;
  When crying cormorants forsake the sea,
  And, stretching to the covert, wing their way;
  When sportful coots run skimming o'er the strand;
  When watchful herons leave their watery stand,
  And, mounting upward with erected flight,
  Gain on the skies, and soar above the sight.
  And oft, before tempestuous winds arise,
  The seeming stars fall headlong from the skies,
  And, shooting through the darkness, gild the night
  With sweeping glories, and long trails of light;
  And chaff with eddy-winds is whirled around,
  And dancing leaves are lifted from the ground;
  And floating feathers on the waters play.
  But, when the winged thunder takes his way
  From the cold north, and east and west engage,
  And at their frontiers meet with equal rage,
  The clouds are crushed; a glut of gathered rain             }
  The hollow ditches fills, and floats the plain;             }
  And sailors furl their dropping sheets amain.               }
  Wet weather seldom hurts the most unwise;
  So plain the signs, such prophets are the skies.
  The wary crane foresees it first, and sails
  Above the storm, and leaves the lowly vales;
  The cow looks up, and from afar can find
  The change of heaven, and snuffs it in the wind;
  The swallow skims the river's watery face;
  The frogs renew the croaks of their loquacious race;
  The careful ant her secret cell forsakes,
  And drags her eggs along the narrow tracks:
  At either horn the rainbow drinks the flood;                }
  Huge flocks of rising rooks forsake their food,             }
  And, crying, seek the shelter of the wood.                  }
  Besides, the several sorts of watery fowls,
  That swim the seas, or haunt the standing pools,
  The swans that sail along the silver flood,
  And dive with stretching necks to search their food,
  Then lave their backs with sprinkling dews in vain,
  And stem the stream to meet the promised rain.
  The crow with clamorous cries the shower demands,
  And single stalks along the desert sands.
  The nightly virgin, while her wheel she plies,
  Foresees the storm impending in the skies,
  When sparkling lamps their sputtering light advance,
  And in the sockets oily bubbles dance.
    Then, after showers, 'tis easy to descry
  Returning suns, and a serener sky:
  The stars shine smarter; and the moon adorns,
  As with unborrowed beams, her sharpened horns.
  The filmy gossamer now flits no more,
  Nor halcyons bask on the short sunny shore:
  Their litter is not tossed by sows unclean;
  But a blue droughty mist descends upon the plain;
  And owls, that mark the setting sun, declare
  A star-light evening, and a morning fair.
  Towering aloft, avenging Nisus flies,
  While, dared, below the guilty Scylla lies.
  Wherever frighted Scylla flies away,
  Swift Nisus follows, and pursues his prey:
  Where injured Nisus takes his airy course,
  Thence trembling Scylla flies, and shuns his force.
  This punishment pursues the unhappy maid,
  And thus the purple hair is dearly paid:
  Then, thrice the ravens rend the liquid air,
  And croaking notes proclaim the settled fair.
  Then round their airy palaces they fly,
  To greet the sun; and, seized with secret joy,
  When storms are over-blown, with food repair
  To their forsaken nests, and callow care.
  Not that I think their breasts with heavenly souls
  Inspired, as man, who destiny controls;
  But, with the changeful temper of the skies,
  As rains condense, and sunshine rarefies,
  So turn the species in their altered minds,
  Composed by calms, and discomposed by winds.
  From hence proceeds the birds' harmonious voice;
  From hence the cows exult, and frisking lambs rejoice.
  Observe the daily circle of the sun,
  And the short year of each revolving moon:
  By them thou shalt foresee the following day,
  Nor shall a starry night thy hopes betray.
  When first the moon appears, if then she shrouds
  Her silver crescent tipped with sable clouds,
  Conclude she bodes a tempest on the main,
  And brews for fields impetuous floods of rain.
  Or, if her face with fiery flushing glow,
  Expect the rattling winds aloft to blow.
  But, four nights old, (for that's the surest sign,)
  With sharpened horns if glorious then she shine,
  Next day, nor only that, but all the moon,
  'Till her revolving race be wholly run,
  Are void of tempests, both by land and sea,
  And sailors in the port their promised vow shall pay.
  Above the rest, the sun, who never lies,
  Foretells the change of weather in the skies:
  For, if he rise unwilling to his race,
  Clouds on his brow, and spots upon his face,
  Or if through mists he shoots his sullen beams,
  Frugal of light, in loose and straggling streams;
  Suspect a drizzling day, with southern rain,
  Fatal to fruits, and flocks, and promised grain.
  Or if Aurora, with half-opened eyes,
  And a pale sickly cheek, salute the skies;
  How shall the vine, with tender leaves, defend
  Her teeming clusters, when the storms descend,
  When ridgy roofs and tiles can scarce avail
  To bar the ruin of the rattling hail?
  But, more than all, the setting sun survey,
  When down the steep of heaven he drives the day:
  For oft we find him finishing his race,
  With various colours erring on his face.
  If fiery red his glowing globe descends,
  High winds and furious tempests he portends:
  But, if his cheeks are swoln with livid blue,
  He bodes wet weather by his watery hue:
  If dusky spots are varied on his brow,
  And, streaked with red, a troubled colour show;
  That sullen mixture shall at once declare
  Winds, rain, and storms, and elemental war.
  What desperate madman then would venture o'er
  The frith, or haul his cables from the shore?
  But, if with purple rays he brings the light,
  And a pure heaven resigns to quiet night,
  No rising winds, or falling storms, are nigh;               }
  But northern breezes through the forest fly,                }
  And drive the rack, and purge the ruffled sky.              }
  The unerring sun by certain signs declares,
  What the late even or early morn prepares,
  And when the south projects a stormy day,
  And when the clearing north will puff the clouds away.
    The sun reveals the secrets of the sky;
  And who dares give the source of light the lie?
  The change of empires often he declares,
  Fierce tumults, hidden treasons, open wars.
  He first the fate of Cæsar did foretell,
  And pitied Rome, when Rome in Cæsar fell;
  In iron clouds concealed the public light,
  And impious mortals feared eternal night.
    Nor was the fact foretold by him alone,--
  Nature herself stood forth, and seconded the sun.
  Earth, air, and seas, with prodigies were signed;
  And birds obscene, and howling dogs, divined.
  What rocks did Ætna's bellowing mouth expire
  From her torn entrails! and what floods of fire!
  What clanks were heard, in German skies afar,
  Of arms, and armies rushing to the war!
  Dire earthquakes rent the solid Alps below,
  And from their summits shook the eternal snow;
  Pale spectres in the close of night were seen,
  And voices heard, of more than mortal men,
  In silent groves: dumb sheep and oxen spoke;
  And streams ran backward, and their beds forsook:
  The yawning earth disclosed the abyss of hell,              }
  The weeping statues did the wars foretell,                  }
  And holy sweat from brazen idols fell.                      }
  Then, rising in his might, the king of floods
  Rushed through the forests, tore the lofty woods,
  And, rolling onward, with a sweepy sway,
  Bore houses, herds, and labouring hinds away.
  Blood sprang from wells, wolves howled in towns by night,
  And boding victims did the priests affright.
  Such peals of thunder never poured from high,
  Nor forky lightnings flashed from such a sullen sky.
  Red meteors ran across the etherial space;
  Stars disappeared, and comets took their place.
  For this, the Emathian plains once more were strowed        }
  With Roman bodies, and just heaven thought good             }
  To fatten twice those fields with Roman blood.              }
  Then, after length of time, the labouring swains,
  Who turn the turfs of those unhappy plains,
  Shall rusty piles from the ploughed furrows take,
  And over empty helmets pass the rake--
  Amazed at antique titles on the stones,
  And mighty reliques of gigantic bones.
    Ye home-born deities, of mortal birth!
  Thou father Romulus, and mother Earth,
  Goddess unmoved! whose guardian arms extend
  O'er Tuscan Tyber's course, and Roman towers defend;
  With youthful Cæsar your joint powers engage,
  Nor hinder him to save the sinking age.
  O! let the blood, already spilt, atone
  For the past crimes of cursed Laomedon!
  Heaven wants thee there; and long the gods, we know,
  Have grudged thee, Cæsar, to the world below,
  Where fraud and rapine right and wrong confound,            }
  Where impious arms from every part resound,                 }
  And monstrous crimes in every shape are crowned.            }
  The peaceful peasant to the wars is pressed;
  The fields lie fallow in inglorious rest;
  The plain no pasture to the flock affords;
  The crooked scythes are straightened into swords:
  And there Euphrates her soft offspring arms,
  And here the Rhine rebellows with alarms;
  The neighbouring cities range on several sides,             }
  Perfidious Mars long-plighted leagues divides,              }
  And o'er the wasted world in triumph rides.                 }
  So four fierce coursers, starting to the race,
  Scour through the plain, and lengthen every pace;
  Nor reins, nor curbs, nor threatening cries, they fear,
  But force along the trembling charioteer.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] The poetry of this book is more sublime than any part of
Virgil, if I have any taste. And if ever I have copied his majestic
style, it is here. The compliment he makes Augustus, almost in the
beginning, is ill imitated by his successors, Lucan and Statius. They
dedicated to tyrants; and their flatteries are gross and fulsome.
Virgil's address is both more lofty and more just. In the three last
lines of this Georgic, I think I have discovered a secret compliment
to the emperor, which none of the commentators have observed. Virgil
had just before described the miseries which Rome had undergone betwixt
the triumvirs and the commonwealth party: in the close of all, he seems
to excuse the crimes committed by his patron Cæsar, as if he were
constrained, against his own temper, to those violent proceedings, by
the necessity of the times in general, but more particularly by his two
partners, Antony and Lepidus,

  _Fertur equis auriga, neque audit currus habenas_.

They were the head-strong horses, who hurried Octavius, the trembling
charioteer, along, and were deaf to his reclaiming them. I observe,
farther, that the present wars, in which all Europe, and part of Asia,
are engaged at present, are waged in the same places here described:

  _Hinc movet Euphrates, illinc Germania, bellum, &c._

as if Virgil had prophesied of this age.

[5] Dr Carey reads _ear_. I have not disturbed the text,
though his conjecture is ingenious.

[6] Restored by Dr Carey. The first and second editions have
_other_.

[7] First edit. Argos; restored by Dr Carey.

[8] _Southern,_ according to the earlier editions; but, as Dr
Carey observes, this must be a mistake of the pen or press.

[9] Dr Carey places a comma after skies, and thus makes _come_
the preterite participle, instead of the verb in the present tense. But
I have followed Dryden's punctuation, which gives a plain meaning.

[10] Dr Carey reads _serenely_, but there is no occasion to
disturb the text. The word _securely_, though bold, is poetical, and
implies the reliance which the husbandman places upon the steady and
serene radiance of the sun.




GEORGICS,




BOOK II.

ARGUMENT.

 _The subject of the following book is planting: in handling of which
 argument, the poet shews all the different methods of raising trees
 describes their variety, and gives rules for the management of each in
 particular. He then points out the soils in which the several plants
 thrive best, and thence takes occasion to run out into the praises
 of Italy: after which, he gives some directions for discovering the
 nature of every soil, prescribes rules for dressing of vines, olives,
 &c. and concludes the Georgic with a panegyric on a country life_.[11]

  Thus far of tillage, and of heavenly signs:
  Now sing, my Muse, the growth of generous vines,
  The shady groves, the woodland progeny,
  And the slow product of Minerva's tree.
  Great father Bacchus! to my song repair;
  For clustering grapes are thy peculiar care:
  For thee, large bunches load the bending vine,
  And the last blessings of the year are thine.
  To thee his joys the jolly autumn owes,
  When the fermenting juice the vat o'erflows.
  Come, strip with me, my god! come drench all o'er
  Thy limbs in must of wine, and drink at every pore.
    Some trees their birth to bounteous Nature owe;
  For some, without the pains of planting, grow.
  With osiers thus the banks of brooks abound,
  Sprung from the watery genius of the ground.
  From the same principles grey willows come,
  Herculean poplar, and the tender broom.
  But some, from seeds inclosed in earth, arise;
  For thus the mastful chesnut mates the skies.
  Hence rise the branching beech and vocal oak,
  Where Jove of old oraculously spoke.
  Some from the root a rising wood disclose:
  Thus elms, and thus the savage cherry grows:
  Thus the green bay, that binds the poet's brows,
  Shoots, and is sheltered by the mother's boughs.
    These ways of planting Nature did ordain,
  For trees and shrubs, and all the sylvan reign.
  Others there are, by late experience found:
  Some cut the shoots, and plant in furrowed ground;
  Some cover rooted stalks in deeper mould;
  Some, cloven stakes; and (wonderous to behold!)
  Their sharpened ends in earth their footing place;
  And the dry poles produce a living race.
  Some bow their vines, which buried in the plain,
  Their tops in distant arches rise again.
  Others no root require; the labourer cuts
  Young slips, and in the soil securely puts.
  Even stumps of olives, bared of leaves, and dead,
  Revive, and oft redeem their withered head.
  'Tis usual now an inmate graff to see
  With insolence invade a foreign tree:
  Thus pears and quinces from the crabtree come,
  And thus the ruddy cornel bears the plum.
    Then let the learned gardener mark with care
  The kinds of stocks, and what those kinds will bear;
  Explore the nature of each several tree,
  And, known, improve with artful industry:
  And let no spot of idle earth be found,
  But cultivate the genius of the ground:
  For open Ismarus will Bacchus please;
  Taburnus loves the shade of olive-trees.
    The virtues of the several soils I sing.--
  Mæcenas, now thy needful succour bring!
  O thou! the better part of my renown,
  Inspire thy poet, and thy poem crown:
  Embark with me, while I new tracts explore,
  With flying sails and breezes from the shore:
  Not that my song, in such a scanty space,
  So large a subject fully can embrace--
  Not though I were supplied with iron lungs,
  A hundred mouths, filled with as many tongues:
  But steer my vessel with a steady hand,
  And coast along the shore in sight of land.
  Nor will I tire thy patience with a train
  Of preface, or what ancient poets feign.
  The trees, which of themselves advance in air,
  Are barren kinds, but strongly built and fair,
  Because the vigour of the native earth
  Maintains the plant, and makes a manly birth.
  Yet these, receiving graffs of other kind,
  Or thence transplanted, change their savage mind,
  Their wildness lose, and, quitting nature's part,
  Obey the rules and discipline of art.
  The same do trees, that, sprung from barren roots,
  In open fields transplanted bear their fruits.
  For, where they grow, the native energy
  Turns all into the substance of the tree,
  Starves and destroys the fruit, is only made
  For brawny bulk, and for a barren shade.
  The plant that shoots from seed, a sullen tree,
  At leisure grows, for late posterity;
  The generous flavour lost, the fruits decay,
  And savage grapes are made the birds' ignoble prey.
  Much labour is required in trees, to tame
  Their wild disorder, and in ranks reclaim.
  Well must the ground be digged, and better dressed,
  New soil to make, and meliorate the rest.
  Old stakes of olive-trees in plants revive;                 }
  By the same method Paphian myrtles live;                    }
  But nobler vines by propagation thrive.                     }
  From roots hard hazels, and from cions, rise;
  Tall ash, and taller oak that mates the skies;
  Palm, poplar, fir, descending from the steep
  Of hills, to try the dangers of the deep.
  The thin-leaved arbute hazel-graffs receives;
  And planes huge apples bear, that bore but leaves.
  Thus mastful beech the bristly chesnut bears,
  And the wild ash is white with blooming pears,
  And greedy swine from grafted elms are fed
  With falling acorns, that on oaks are bred.
    But various are the ways to change the state
  Of plants, to bud, to graff, to inoculate.
  For, where the tender rinds of trees disclose
  Their shooting gems, a swelling knot there grows;
  Just in that space a narrow slit we make,
  Then other buds from bearing trees we take;
  Inserted thus, the wounded rind we close,
  In whose moist womb the admitted infant grows.
  But, when the smoother bole from knots is free,
  We make a deep incision in the tree,
  And in the solid wood the slip inclose;
  The batt'ning bastard shoots again and grows;
  And in short space the laden boughs arise,
  With happy fruit advancing to the skies.
  The mother plant admires the leaves unknown
  Of alien trees, and apples not her own.
    Of vegetable woods are various kinds,
  And the same species are of several minds.
  Lotes, willows, elms, have different forms allowed;
  So funeral cypress, rising like a shrowd.
  Fat olive-trees of sundry sorts appear,
  Of sundry shapes their unctuous berries bear.
  Radii long olives, Orchites round produce,
  And bitter Pausia, pounded for the juice.
  Alcinoüs' orchard various apples bears:
  Unlike are bergamots and pounder pears.
  Nor our Italian vines produce the shape,
  Or taste, or flavour, of the Lesbian grape.
  The Thasian vines in richer soils abound;
  The Mareotic grow in barren ground.
  The Psythian grape we dry: Lagean juice
  Will stammering tongues and staggering feet produce.
  Rath ripe are some, and some of later kind,
  Of golden some, and some of purple rind.
  How shall I praise the Rhætian grape divine,
  Which yet contends not with Falernian wine?
  The Aminean many a consulship survives,
  And longer than the Lydian vintage lives,
  Or high Phanæus, king of Chian growth:
  But, for large quantities and lasting, both,
  The less Argitis bears the prize away.
  The Rhodian, sacred to the solemn day,
  In second services is poured to Jove,
  And best accepted by the gods above.
  Nor must Bumastus his old honours lose,
  In length and largeness like the dugs of cows.
  I pass the rest, whose every race, and name,
  And kinds, are less material to my theme;
  Which who would learn, as soon may tell the sands,
  Driven by the western wind on Libyan lands,
  Or number, when the blustering Eurus roars,
  The billows beating on Ionian shores.
    Nor every plant on every soil will grow:
  The sallow loves the watery ground, and low;
  The marshes, alders: Nature seems to ordain
  The rocky cliff for the wild ashes reign;
  The baleful yew to northern blasts assigns,
  To shores the myrtles, and to mounts the vines.
    Regard the extremest cultivated coast,
  From hot Arabia to the Scythian frost:
  All sorts of trees their several countries know;            }
  Black ebon only will in India grow,                         }
  And odorous frankincense on the Sabæan bough.               }
  Balm slowly trickles through the bleeding veins
  Of happy shrubs in Idumæan plains.
  The green Egyptian thorn, for medicine good,
  With Æthiops' hoary trees and woolly wood,
  Let others tell; and how the Seres spin
  Their fleecy forests in a slender twine;
  With mighty trunks of trees on Indian shores,
  Whose height above the feathered arrow soars,
  Shot from the toughest bow, and, by the brawn
  Of expert archers, with vast vigour drawn.
  Sharp-tasted citrons Median climes produce,
  (Bitter the rind, but generous is the juice,)
  A cordial fruit, a present antidote
  Against the direful stepdame's deadly draught,
  Who, mixing wicked weeds with words impure,
  The fate of envied orphans would procure.
  Large is the plant, and like a laurel grows,
  And, did it not a different scent disclose,
  A laurel were: the fragrant flowers contemn
  The stormy winds, tenacious of their stem.
  With this, the Medes to labouring age bequeath
  New lungs, and cure the sourness of the breath.
    But neither Median woods, (a plenteous land,)
  Fair Ganges, Hermus rolling golden sand,
  Nor Bactria, nor the richer Indian fields,
  Nor all the gummy stores Arabia yields,
  Nor any foreign earth of greater name,                      }
  Can with sweet Italy contend in fame.                       }
  No bulls, whose nostrils breathe a living flame,            }
  Have turned our turf; no teeth of serpents here
  Were sown, an armed host and iron crop to bear.
  But fruitful vines, and the fat olive's freight,
  And harvests heavy with their fruitful weight,
  Adorn our fields; and on the cheerful green
  The grazing flocks and lowing herds are seen.
  The warrior horse, here bred, is taught to train:
  There flows Clitumnus through the flowery plain,
  Whose waves, for triumphs after prosperous war,
  The victim ox and snowy sheep prepare.
  Perpetual spring our happy climate sees:                    }
  Twice breed the cattle, and twice bear the trees;           }
  And summer suns recede by slow degrees.                     }
    Our land is from the rage of tigers freed,
  Nor nourishes the lion's angry seed;
  Nor poisonous aconite is here produced,
  Or grows unknown, or is, when known, refused;
  Nor in so vast a length our serpents glide,
  Or raised on such a spiry volume ride.
    Next add our cities of illustrious name,
  Their costly labour, and stupendous frame;
  Our forts on steepy hills, that far below
  See wanton streams in winding valleys flow;
  Our twofold seas, that, washing either side,
  A rich recruit of foreign stores provide;
  Our spacious lakes; thee, Larius, first; and next
  Benacus, with tempestuous billows vexed.
  Or shall I praise thy ports, or mention make
  Of the vast mound that binds the Lucrine lake?
  Or the disdainful sea, that, shut from thence,
  Roars round the structure, and invades the fence,
  There, where secure the Julian waters glide,
  Or where Avernus' jaws admit the Tyrrhene tide?
  Our quarries, deep in earth, were famed of old
  For veins of silver, and for ore of gold.
  The inhabitants themselves their country grace:
  Hence rose the Marsian and Sabellian race,
  Strong-limbed and stout, and to the wars inclined,
  And hard Ligurians, a laborious kind,
  And Volscians armed with iron-headed darts.
  Besides--an offspring of undaunted hearts--
  The Decii, Marii, great Camillus, came
  From hence, and greater Scipio's double name,
  And mighty Cæsar, whose victorious arms
  To farthest Asia carry fierce alarms,
  Avert unwarlike Indians from his Rome,
  Triumph abroad, secure our peace at home.
    Hail, sweet Saturnian soil! of fruitful grain
  Great parent, greater of illustrious men!
  For thee my tuneful accents will I raise,
  And treat of arts disclosed in ancient days,
  Once more unlock for thee the sacred spring,
  And old Ascræan verse in Roman cities sing.
    The nature of the several soils now see,
  Their strength, their colour, their fertility:
  And first for heath, and barren hilly ground,
  Where meagre clay and flinty stones abound,
  Where the poor soil all succour seems to want--
  Yet this suffices the Palladian plant.
  Undoubted signs of such a soil are found;                   }
  For here wild olive-shoots o'erspread the ground,           }
  And heaps of berries strew the fields around.               }
  But, where the soil, with fattening moisture filled,
  Is clothed with grass, and fruitful to be tilled,
  Such as in cheerful vales we view from high,
  Which dripping rocks with rolling streams supply,
  And feed with ooze; where rising hillocks run
  In length, and open to the southern sun;
  Where fern succeeds, ungrateful to the plough--
  That gentle ground to generous grapes allow.
  Strong stocks of vines it will in time produce,
  And overflow the vats with friendly juice,
  Such as our priests in golden goblets pour
  To gods, the givers of the cheerful hour,
  Then when the bloated Tuscan blows his horn,
  And reeking entrails are in chargers borne.
    If herds or fleecy flocks be more thy care,
  Or goats that graze the field, and burn it bare,
  Then seek Tarentum's lawns, and farthest coast,
  Or such a field as hapless Mantua lost,
  Where silver swans sail down the watery road,
  And graze the floating herbage of the flood.
  There crystal streams perpetual tenor keep,
  Nor food nor springs are wanting to thy sheep;
  For, what the day devours, the nightly dew
  Shall to the morn in pearly drops renew.
  Fat crumbling earth is fitter for the plough,
  Putrid and loose above, and black below;
  For ploughing is an imitative toil,
  Resembling nature in an easy soil.
  No land for seed like this; no fields afford
  So large an income to the village lord:
  No toiling teams from harvest-labour come
  So late at night, so heavy-laden home.
  The like of forest land is understood,                      }
  From whence the surly ploughman grubs the wood,             }
  Which had for length of ages idle stood.                    }
  Then birds forsake the ruins of their seat,
  And, flying from their nests, their callow young forget.
  The coarse lean gravel, on the mountain-sides,
  Scarce dewy beverage for the bees provides;
  Nor chalk nor crumbling stones, the food of snakes,
  That work in hollow earth their winding tracks.
  The soil exhaling clouds of subtile dews,
  Imbibing moisture which with ease she spews,
  Which rusts not iron, and whose mould is clean,
  Well clothed with cheerful grass, and ever green,
  Is good for olives, and aspiring vines,
  Embracing husband elms in amorous twines;
  Is fit for feeding cattle, fit to sow,
  And equal to the pasture and the plough.
  Such is the soil of fat Campanian fields;
  Such large increase the land that joins Vesuvius yields;
  And such a country could Acerræ boast,
  Till Clanius overflowed the unhappy coast.
    I teach thee next the differing soils to know,
  The light for vines, the heavier for the plough.
  Chuse first a place for such a purpose fit:
  There dig the solid earth, and sink a pit;
  Next fill the hole with its own earth again,
  And trample with thy feet, and tread it in:
  Then, if it rise not to the former height
  Of superfice, conclude that soil is light,
  A proper ground for pasturage and vines.
  But, if the sullen earth, so pressed, repines
  Within its native mansion to retire,
  And stays without, a heap of heavy mire,
  'Tis good for arable, a glebe that asks
  Tough teams of oxen, and laborious tasks.
    Salt earth and bitter are not fit to sow,
  Nor will be tamed or mended by the plough.
  Sweet grapes degenerate there; and fruits, declined
  From their first flavorous taste, renounce their kind.
  This truth by sure experiment is tried;
  For first an osier colander provide
  Of twigs thick wrought, (such toiling peasants twine,
  When through strait passages they strain their wine:)
  In this close vessel place that earth accursed,
  But filled brimfull with wholesome water first;
  Then run it through; the drops will rope around,
  And, by the bitter taste, disclose the ground.
  The fatter earth by handling we may find,
  With ease distinguished from the meagre kind:
  Poor soil will crumble into dust; the rich
  Will to the fingers cleave like clammy pitch:
  Moist earth produces corn and grass, but both
  Too rank and too luxuriant in their growth.
  Let not my land so large a promise boast,
  Lest the lank ears in length of stem be lost.
  The heavier earth is by her weight betrayed;
  The lighter in the poising hand is weighed.
  'Tis easy to distinguish by the sight,
  The colour of the soil, and black from white.
  But the cold ground is difficult to know;                   }
  Yet this the plants, that prosper there, will show--        }
  Black ivy, pitch-trees, and the baleful yew.                }
  These rules considered well, with early care
  The vineyard destined for thy vines prepare:
  But, long before the planting, dig the ground,
  With furrows deep that cast a rising mound.
  The clods, exposed to winter winds, will bake;
  For putrid earth will best in vineyards take;
  And hoary frosts, after the painful toil
  Of delving hinds, will rot the mellow soil.
    Some peasants, not to omit the nicest care,
  Of the same soil their nursery prepare,
  With that of their plantation; lest the tree,
  Translated, should not with the soil agree.
  Beside, to plant it as it was, they mark
  The heaven's four quarters on the tender bark,
  And to the north or south restore the side,
  Which at their birth did heat or cold abide:
  So strong is custom; such effects can use
  In tender souls of pliant plants produce.
    Chuse next a province for thy vineyard's reign,
  On hills above, or in the lowly plain.
  If fertile fields or valleys be thy choice,
  Plant thick; for bounteous Bacchus will rejoice
  In close plantations there; but, if the vine
  On rising ground be placed, or hills supine,
  Extend thy loose battalions largely wide,
  Opening thy ranks and files on either side,
  But marshalled all in order as they stand;
  And let no soldier straggle from his band.
  As legions in the field their front display,
  To try the fortune of some doubtful day,
  And move to meet their foes with sober pace,
  Strict to their figure, though in wider space,
  Before the battle joins, while from afar
  The field yet glitters with the pomp of war,
  And equal Mars, like an impartial lord,
  Leaves all to fortune, and the dint of sword--
  So let thy vines in intervals be set,
  But not their rural discipline forget;
  Indulge their width, and add a roomy space,
  That their extremest lines may scarce embrace;
  Nor this alone to indulge a vain delight,
  And make a pleasing prospect for the sight;
  But, for the ground itself, this only way                   }
  Can equal vigour to the plants convey,                      }
  Which, crowded, want the room, their branches to display.   }
    How deep they must be planted, would'st thou know?
  In shallow furrows vines securely grow.
  Not so the rest of plants; for Jove's own tree,
  That holds the woods in awful sovereignty,
  Requires a depth of lodging in the ground,
  And, next the lower skies, a bed profound:
  High as his topmost boughs to heaven ascend,
  So low his roots to hell's dominion tend.
  Therefore, nor winds, nor winter's rage o'erthrows
  His bulky body, but unmoved he grows;
  For length of ages lasts his happy reign,
  And lives of mortal man contend in vain.
  Full in the midst of his own strength he stands,            }
  Stretching his brawny arms, and leafy hands;                }
  His shade protects the plains, his head the hills commands. }
    The hurtful hazel in thy vineyard shun;
  Nor plant it to receive the setting sun;
  Nor break the topmost branches from the tree;
  Nor prune, with blunted knife, the progeny.
  Root up wild olives from thy laboured lands;
  For sparkling fire, from hinds' unwary hands,
  Is often scattered o'er their unctuous rinds,
  And after spread abroad by raging winds:
  For first the smouldering flame the trunk receives;
  Ascending thence, it crackles in the leaves;
  At length victorious to the top aspires,
  Involving all the wood in smoky fires;
  But most, when, driven by winds, the flaming storm
  Of the long files destroys the beauteous form.
  In ashes then the unhappy vineyard lies;
  Nor will the blasted plants from ruin rise;
  Nor will the withered stock be green again;
  But the wild olive shoots, and shades the ungrateful plain.
  Be not seduced with wisdom's empty shows,
  To stir the peaceful ground when Boreas blows.
  When winter frosts constrain the field with cold,
  The fainty root can take no steady hold.
  But, when the golden spring reveals the year,
  And the white bird returns, whom serpents fear,
  That season deem the best to plant thy vines:
  Next that, is when autumnal warmth declines,
  Ere heat is quite decayed, or cold begun,
  Or Capricorn admits the winter sun.
    The spring adorns the woods, renews the leaves;
  The womb of earth the genial seed receives:
  For then almighty Jove descends, and pours
  Into his buxom bride his fruitful showers;
  And, mixing his large limbs with hers, he feeds
  Her births with kindly juice, and fosters teeming seeds.
  Then joyous birds frequent the lonely grove,
  And beasts, by nature stung, renew their love.
  Then fields the blades of buried corn disclose;             }
  And, while the balmy western spirit blows,                  }
  Earth to the breath her bosom dares expose.                 }
  With kindly moisture then the plants abound;
  The grass securely springs above the ground;
  The tender twig shoots upward to the skies,
  And on the faith of the new sun relies.
  The swerving vines on the tall elms prevail;
  Unhurt by southern showers, or northern hail,
  They spread their gems, the genial warmth to share,
  And boldly trust their buds in open air.
  In this soft season, (let me dare to sing,)                 }
  The world was hatched by heaven's imperial king--           }
  In prime of all the year, and holidays of spring.           }
  Then did the new creation first appear;
  Nor other was the tenor of the year,
  When laughing heaven did the great birth attend;
  And eastern winds their wintery breath suspend:
  Then sheep first saw the sun in open fields;
  And savage beasts were sent to stock the wilds;
  And golden stars flew up to light the skies;
  And man's relentless race from stony quarries rise.
  Nor could the tender new creation bear
  The excessive heats or coldness of the year,
  But, chilled by winter, or by summer fired,
  The middle temper of the spring required,
  When warmth and moisture did at once abound,
  And heaven's indulgence brooded on the ground.
    For what remains, in depth of earth secure
  Thy covered plants, and dung with hot manure;
  And shells and gravel in the ground inclose;
  For through their hollow chinks the water flows,
  Which, thus imbibed, returns in misty dews,
  And, steaming up, the rising plant renews.
  Some husbandmen, of late, have found the way,               }
  A hilly heap of stones above to lay,                        }
  And press the plants with shards of potters' clay.          }
  This fence against immoderate rain they found,
  Or when the Dog-star cleaves the thirsty ground.
    Be mindful, when thou hast entombed the shoot,
  With store of earth around to feed the root;
  With iron teeth of rakes and prongs, to move
  The crusted earth, and loosen it above.
  Then exercise thy sturdy steers to plough
  Betwixt thy vines, and teach the feeble row
  To mount on reeds, and wands, and, upward led,
  On ashen poles to raise their forky head.
  On these new crutches let them learn to walk,
  Till, swerving upwards with a stronger stalk,
  They brave the winds, and, clinging to their guide,
  On tops of elms at length triumphant ride.
  But, in their tender nonage, while they spread
  Their springing leaves, and lift their infant head,
  And upward while they shoot in open air,
  Indulge their childhood, and the nurselings spare;
  Nor exercise thy rage on new-born life;
  But let thy hand supply the pruning-knife,
  And crop luxuriant stragglers, nor be loth
  To strip the branches of their leafy growth.
  But, when the rooted vines, with steady hold,
  Can clasp their elms, then, husbandman, be bold
  To lop the disobedient boughs, that strayed
  Beyond their ranks; let crooked steel invade
  The lawless troops, which discipline disclaim,
  And their superfluous growth with rigour tame.
  Next, fenced with hedges and deep ditches round,
  Exclude the encroaching cattle from thy ground,
  While yet the tender gems but just appear,
  Unable to sustain the uncertain year;
  Whose leaves are not alone foul winter's prey,
  But oft by summer suns are scorched away,
  And, worse than both, become the unworthy browze            }
  Of buffaloes, salt goats, and hungry cows.                  }
  For not December's frost, that burns the boughs,            }
  Nor dog-days' parching heat, that splits the rocks,        }
  Are half so harmful as the greedy flocks,                  }
  Their venomed bite, and scars indented on the stocks.      }
  For this, the malefactor goat was laid
  On Bacchus' altar, and his forfeit paid.
  At Athens thus old comedy began,
  When round the streets the reeling actors ran,
  In country villages, and crossing ways,
  Contending for the prizes of their plays;
  And, glad with Bacchus, on the grassy soil,
  Leaped o'er the skins of goats besmeared with oil.
  Thus Roman youth, derived from ruined Troy,
  In rude Saturnian rhymes express their joy;
  With taunts, and laughter loud, their audience please,
  Deformed with vizards, cut from barks of trees:
  In jolly hymns they praise the god of wine,                 }
  Whose earthen images adorn the pine,                        }
  And there are hung on high, in honour of the vine.          }
  A madness so devout the vineyard fills;
  In hollow valleys and on rising hills,
  On whate'er side he turns his honest face,
  And dances in the wind, those fields are in his grace.
  To Bacchus therefore let us tune our lays,
  And in our mother tongue resound his praise.
  Thin cakes in chargers, and a guilty goat,
  Dragged by the horns, be to his altars brought;
  Whose offered entrails shall his crime reproach,
  And drip their fatness from the hazel broach.
  To dress thy vines, new labour is required;
  Nor must the painful husbandman be tired:
  For thrice, at least, in compass of the year,
  Thy vineyard must employ the sturdy steer
  To turn the glebe, besides thy daily pain
  To break the clods, and make the surface plain,
  To unload the branches, or the leaves to thin,
  That suck the vital moisture of the vine.
  Thus in a circle runs the peasant's pain,
  And the year rolls within itself again.
  Even in the lowest months, when storms have shed
  From vines the hairy honours of their head,
  Not then the drudging hind his labour ends,
  But to the coming year his care extends.
  Even then the naked vine he persecutes;
  His pruning knife at once reforms and cuts.
  Be first to dig the ground; be first to burn
  The branches lopt; and first the props return
  Into thy house, that bore the burdened vines;
  But last to reap the vintage of thy wines.
  Twice in the year luxuriant leaves o'ershade
  The encumbered vine; rough brambles twice invade:
  Hard laboured both! Commend the large excess
  Of spacious vineyards; cultivate the less.
  Besides, in woods the shrubs of prickly thorn,
  Sallows and reeds on banks of rivers born,
  Remain to cut; for vineyards useful found,                  }
  To stay thy vines, and fence thy fruitful ground.           }
  Nay,[12] when thy tender trees at length are bound,         }
  When peaceful vines from pruning-hooks are free,          }
  When husbands have surveyed the last degree,              }
  And utmost files of plants, and ordered every tree;       }
  Even when they sing at ease in full content,
  Insulting o'er the toils they underwent,
  Yet still they find a future task remain,
  To turn the soil, and break the clods again;
  And, after all, their joys are unsincere,
  While falling rains on ripening grapes they fear.
  Quite opposite to these are olives found:
  No dressing they require, and dread no wound,
  Nor rakes nor harrows need; but, fixed below,
  Rejoice in open air, and unconcernedly grow.
  The soil itself due nourishment supplies:
  Plough but the furrows, and the fruits arise,
  Content with small endeavours, till they spring.            }
  Soft peace they figure, and sweet plenty bring;             }
  Then olives plant, and hymns to Pallas sing.                }
    Thus apple-trees, whose trunks are strong to bear
  Their spreading boughs, exert themselves in air,
  Want no supply, but stand secure alone,                     }
  Not trusting foreign forces, but their own,                 }
  Till with the ruddy freight the bending branches groan.     }
    Thus trees of nature, and each common bush,
  Uncultivated thrive, and with red berries blush.
  Vile shrubs are shorn for browze; the towering height
  Of unctuous trees are torches for the night.
  And shall we doubt, (indulging easy sloth,)
  To sow, to set, and to reform their growth?
  To leave the lofty plants--the lowly kind
  Are for the shepherd or the sheep designed.
  Even humble broom and osiers have their use,
  And shade for sheep, and food for flocks, produce;
  Hedges for corn, and honey for the bees,
  Besides the pleasing prospect of the trees.
  How goodly looks Cytorus, ever green
  With boxen groves! with what delight are seen
  Narycian woods of pitch, whose gloomy shade
  Seems for retreat of heavenly Muses made!
  But much more pleasing are those fields to see,
  That need not ploughs, nor human industry.
  Even cold Caucasean rocks with trees are spread,
  And wear green forests on their hilly head.
  Though bending from the blast of eastern storms,
  Though shent their leaves, and shattered are their arms,
  Yet heaven their various plants for use designs--
  For houses, cedars--and, for shipping, pines--
  Cypress provides for spokes and wheels of wains,
  And all for keels of ships, that scour the watery plains.
  Willows in twigs are fruitful, elms in leaves;
  The war, from stubborn myrtle, shafts receives--
  From cornels, javelins; and the tougher yew
  Receives the bending figure of a bow.
  Nor box, nor limes, without their use are made,             }
  Smooth-grained, and proper for the turner's trade;          }
  Which curious hands may carve, and steel with ease invade.  }
  Light alder stems the Po's impetuous tide,
  And bees in hollow oaks their honey hide.
  Now balance, with these gifts, the fumy joys
  Of wine, attended with eternal noise.
  Wine urged to lawless lust the Centaurs' train;
  Through wine they quarrelled, and through wine were slain.
    O happy, if he knew his happy state,
  The swain, who, free from business and debate,
  Receives his easy food from nature's hand,
  And just returns of cultivated land!
  No palace, with a lofty gate, he wants,
  To admit the tides of early visitants,
  With eager eyes devouring, as they pass,
  The breathing figures of Corinthian brass.
  No statues threaten, from high pedestals;
  No Persian arras hides his homely walls,
  With antic vests, which, through their shady fold,
  Betray the streaks of ill-dissembled gold:
  He boasts no wool, whose native white is dyed
  With purple poison of Assyrian pride;
  No costly drugs of Araby defile,
  With foreign scents, the sweetness of his oil:
  But easy quiet, a secure retreat,
  A harmless life that knows not how to cheat,
  With home-bred plenty, the rich owner bless,
  And rural pleasures crown his happiness.
  Unvexed with quarrels, undisturbed with noise,
  The country king his peaceful realm enjoys--
  Cool grots, and living lakes, the flowery pride
  Of meads, and streams that through the valley glide,
  And shady groves that easy sleep invite,
  And, after toilsome days, a soft repose at night.
  Wild beasts of nature in his woods abound;
  And youth, of labour patient, plough the ground,
  Inured to hardship, and to homely fare.
  Nor venerable age is wanting there,
  In great examples to the youthful train;
  Nor are the gods adored with rites profane.
  From hence Astræa took her flight; and here
  The prints of her departing steps appear.
    Ye sacred Muses! with whose beauty fired,
  My soul is ravished, and my brain inspired--
  Whose priest I am, whose holy fillets wear--
  Would you your poet's first petition hear;
  Give me the ways of wandering stars to know,
  The depths of heaven above, and earth below:
  Teach me the various labours of the moon,
  And whence proceed the eclipses of the sun;
  Why flowing tides prevail upon the main,
  And in what dark recess they shrink again;
  What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays
  The summer nights, and shortens winter days.
  But, if my heavy blood restrain the flight                  }
  Of my free soul, aspiring to the height                     }
  Of nature, and unclouded fields of light--                  }
  My next desire is, void of care and strife,
  To lead a soft, secure, inglorious life--
  A country cottage near a crystal flood,
  A winding valley, and a lofty wood.
  Some god conduct me to the sacred shades,
  Where Bacchanals are sung by Spartan maids,
  Or lift me high to Hæmus' hilly crown,
  Or in the plains of Tempe lay me down,
  Or lead me to some solitary place,
  And cover my retreat from human race.
    Happy the man, who, studying nature's laws,
  Through known effects can trace the sacred cause--
  His mind possessing in a quiet state,
  Fearless of fortune, and resigned to fate!
  And happy too is he, who decks the bowers
  Of Sylvans, and adores the rural powers--
  Whose mind, unmoved, the bribes of courts can see,
  Their glittering baits, and purple slavery--
  Nor hopes the people's praise, nor fears their frown,       }
  Nor, when contending kindred tear the crown,                }
  Will set up one, or pull another down.                      }
    Without concern he hears, but hears from far,
  Of tumults, and descents, and distant war;
  Nor with a superstitious fear is awed,
  For what befalls at home, or what abroad.
  Nor envies he the rich their heapy store,
  Nor his own peace disturbs with pity for the poor.
  He feeds on fruits, which, of their own accord,
  The willing ground and laden trees afford.
  From his loved home no lucre him can draw;                  }
  The senate's mad decrees he never saw;                      }
  Nor heard, at bawling bars, corrupted law.                  }
  Some to the seas, and some to camps, resort,
  And some with impudence invade the court:
  In foreign countries, others seek renown;
  With wars and taxes, others waste their own,
  And houses burn, and household gods deface,
  To drink in bowls with glittering gems enchase,
  To loll on couches, rich with citron steds,
  And lay their guilty limbs in Tyrian beds.
  This wretch in earth entombs his golden ore,
  Hovering and brooding on his buried store.
  Some patriot fools to popular praise aspire
  Of public speeches, which worse fools admire,
  While, from both benches, with redoubled sounds,
  The applause of lords and commoners abounds.
  Some, through ambition, or through thirst of gold,
  Have slain their brothers, or their country sold,
  And, leaving their sweet homes, in exile run
  To lands that lie beneath another sun.
    The peasant, innocent of all these ills,                  }
  With crooked ploughs the fertile fallows tills,             }
  And the round year with daily labour fills.                 }
  From hence the country markets are supplied:
  Enough remains for household charge beside,
  His wife and tender children to sustain.
  And gratefully to feed his dumb deserving train.
  Nor cease his labours, till the yellow field
  A full return of bearded harvest yield--
  A crop so plenteous, as the land to load,
  O'ercome the crowded barns, and lodge on ricks abroad.
  Thus every several season is employed,
  Some spent in toil, and some in ease enjoyed.
  The yeaning ewes prevent the springing year:
  The laded boughs their fruits in autumn bear:
  'Tis then the vine her liquid harvest yields,
  Baked in the sun-shine of ascending fields.
  The winter comes; and then the falling mast
  For greedy swine provides a full repast:
  Then olives, ground in mills, their fatness boast,
  And winter fruits are mellowed by the frost.
  His cares are eased with intervals of bliss;
  His little children, climbing for a kiss,
  Welcome their father's late return at night;
  His faithful bed is crowned with chaste delight.
  His kine with swelling udders ready stand,
  And, lowing for the pail, invite the milker's hand.
  His wanton kids, with budding horns prepared,
  Fight harmless battles in his homely yard:
  Himself, in rustic pomp, on holidays,                       }
  To rural powers a just oblation pays,                       }
  And on the green his careless limbs displays.               }
  The hearth is in the midst; the herdsmen, round
  The cheerful fire, provoke his health in goblets crown'd.
  He calls on Bacchus, and propounds the prize;               }
  The groom his fellow-groom at buts defies,                  }
  And bends his bow, and levels with his eyes;                }
  Or, stript for wrestling, smears his limbs with oil,
  And watches, with a trip his foe to foil.
  Such was the life the frugal Sabines led;
  So Remus and his brother god were bred,
  From whom the austere Etrurian virtue rose;
  And this rude life our homely fathers chose.
  Old Rome from such a race derived her birth,
  (The seat of empire, and the conquered earth,)
  Which now on seven high hills triumphant reigns,
  And in that compass all the world contains.
  Ere Saturn's rebel son usurped the skies,
  When beasts were only slain for sacrifice,
  While peaceful Crete enjoyed her ancient lord,
  Ere sounding hammers forged the inhuman sword,
  Ere hollow drums were beat, before the breath
  Of brazen trumpets rung the peals of death,
  The good old god his hunger did assuage
  With roots and herbs, and gave the golden age.
  But, over-laboured with so long a course,
  'Tis time to set at ease the smoking horse.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] The Praises of Italy, (translated by the learned and
every way excellent Mr Chetwood,) which are printed in one of my
Miscellany Poems, are the greatest ornament of this book: wherein, for
want of sufficient skill in gardening, agriculture, &c. I may possibly
be mistaken in some terms. But, concerning grafting, my honoured friend
Sir William Bowyer has assured me, that Virgil has shewn more of
poetry than skill, at least in relation to our more northern climates;
and that many of our stocks will not receive such grafts as our poet
tells us would bear in Italy. Nature has conspired with art to make
the garden at Denham Court, of Sir William's own plantation, one of
the most delicious spots of ground in England: it contains not above
five acres (just the compass of Alcinoüs's garden, described in the
Odysses:) but Virgil says, in this very Georgic,

  ----_Laudato ingentia rura;
  Exiguum colito_.

[12] Dryden seems to have left this verse unfinished, for all
editions prior to Dr Carey's read _Nor_. It is probable, he meant to
give the sentence a different construction from what it now presents,
but, having changed his purpose, forgot to alter the beginning.




GEORGICS.




BOOK III.

ARGUMENT.

 _This book begins with the invocation of some rural deities, and a
 compliment to Augustus; after which Virgil directs himself to Mæcenas,
 and enters on his subject. He lays down rules for the breeding and
 management of horses, oxen, sheep, goats, and dogs; and interweaves
 several pleasant descriptions of a chariot-race, of the battle of the
 bulls, of the force of love, and of the Scythian winter. In the latter
 part of the book, he relates the diseases incident to cattle; and ends
 with the description of a fatal murrain that formerly raged among the
 Alps._


  Thy fields, propitious Pales, I rehearse;
  And sing thy pastures in no vulgar verse,
  Amphrysian shepherd! the Lycæan woods,
  Arcadia's flowery plains, and pleasing floods.
    All other themes, that careless minds invite,
  Are worn with use, unworthy me to write.
  Busiris' altars, and the dire decrees
  Of hard Eurystheus, every reader sees:
  Hylas the boy, Latona's erring isle,
  And Pelops' ivory shoulder, and his toil
  For fair Hippodame, with all the rest
  Of Grecian tales, by poets are expressed.
  New ways I must attempt, my grovelling name
  To raise aloft, and wing my flight to fame.
    I, first of Romans, shall in triumph come
  From conquered Greece and bring her trophies home,
  With foreign spoils adorn my native place,
  And with Idume's palms my Mantua grace.
  Of Parian stone a temple will I raise,
  Where the slow Mincius through the valley strays,
  Where cooling streams invite the flocks to drink,
  And reeds defend the winding water's brink.
  Full in the midst shall mighty Cæsar stand,
  Hold the chief honours, and the dome command.
  Then I, conspicuous in my Tyrian gown,
  (Submitting to his godhead my renown,)
  A hundred coursers from the goal will drive:
  The rival chariots in the race shall strive.
  All Greece shall flock from far, my games to see;
  The whorlbat, and the rapid race, shall be
  Reserved for Cæsar, and ordained by me.
  Myself, with olive crowned, the gifts will bear.
  Even now methinks the public shouts I hear;
  The passing pageants, and the pomps appear.
  I to the temple will conduct the crew,
  The sacrifice and sacrificers view,
  From thence return, attended with my train,
  Where the proud theatres disclose the scene,
  Which interwoven Britons seem to raise,
  And shew the triumph which their shame displays.
  High o'er the gate, in elephant and gold,
  The crowd shall Cæsar's Indian war behold:
  The Nile shall flow beneath; and, on the side,
  His shattered ships on brazen pillars ride.
  Next him Niphates,[13] with inverted urn,
  And dropping sedge,[14] shall his Armenia mourn;
  And Asian cities in our triumph borne.
  With backward bows the Parthians shall be there,
  And, spurring from the fight, confess their fear.
  A double wreath shall crown our Cæsar's brows--
  Two differing trophies, from two different foes.
  Europe with Afric in his fame shall join;
  But neither shore his conquest[15] shall confine.
  The Parian marble there shall seem to move
  In breathing statues, not unworthy Jove,
  Resembling heroes, whose etherial root
  Is Jove himself, and Cæsar is the fruit.
  Tros and his race the sculptor shall employ;
  And he--the god who built the walls of Troy;
  Envy herself at last, grown pale and dumb,
  (By Cæsar combated and overcome,)
  Shall give her hands, and fear the curling snakes
  Of lashing Furies, and the burning lakes;
  The pains of famished Tantalus shall feel,                  }
  And Sisyphus, that labours up the hill                      }
  The rolling rock in vain; and curst Ixion's wheel.          }
  Meantime we must pursue the sylvan lands,                 }
  (The abode of nymphs,) untouched by former hands:         }
  For such, Mæcenas, are thy hard commands.                 }
  Without thee, nothing lofty can I sing.
  Come then, and, with thyself, thy genius bring,
  With which inspired, I brook no dull delay:                 }
  Cithæron loudly calls me to my way;                         }
  Thy hounds, Täyg'tus, open, and pursue their prey.          }
  High Epidaurus urges on my speed,
  Famed for his hills, and for his horses' breed:
  From hills and dales the cheerful cries rebound;
  For Echo hunts along, and propagates the sound.
    A time will come, when my maturer Muse,
  In Cæsar's wars, a nobler theme shall chuse,
  And through more ages bear my sovereign's praise,
  Than have from Tithon past to Cæsar's days.
    The generous youth, who, studious of the prize,
  The race of running coursers multiplies,
  Or to the plough the sturdy bullock breeds,
  May know, that from the dam the worth of each proceeds.
  The mother cow must wear a lowering look,
  Sour-headed, strongly necked, to bear the yoke.
  Her double dew-lap from her chin descends,
  And at her thighs the ponderous burden ends.
  Long are her sides and large; her limbs are great;
  Rough are her ears, and broad her horny feet.
  Her colour shining black, but flecked with white;
  She tosses from the yoke; provokes the fight:
  She rises in her gait, is free from fears,
  And in her face a bull's resemblance bears:
  Her ample forehead with a star is crowned,
  And with her length of tail she sweeps the ground.
  The bull's insult at four she may sustain;
  But, after ten, from nuptial rites refrain.
  Six seasons use; but then release the cow,
  Unfit for love, and for the labouring plough.
    Now, while their youth is filled with kindly fire,
  Submit thy females to the lusty sire:
  Watch the quick motions of the frisking tail;               }
  Then serve their fury with the rushing male,                }
  Indulging pleasure, lest the breed should fail.             }
    In youth alone, unhappy mortals live;
  But, ah! the mighty bliss is fugitive:
  Discoloured sickness, anxious labours, come,
  And age, and death's inexorable doom.
    Yearly thy herds in vigour will impair.
  Recruit and mend them with thy yearly care:
  Still propagate; for still they fall away:
  'Tis prudence to prevent the entire decay.
    Like diligence requires the courser's race,
  In early choice, and for a longer space.
  The colt, that for a stallion is designed,                  }
  By sure presages shews his generous kind:                   }
  Of able body, sound of limb and wind,                       }
  Upright he walks, on pasterns firm and straight;
  His motions easy; prancing in his gait;
  The first to lead the way, to tempt the flood,
  To pass the bridge unknown, nor fear the trembling wood;
  Dauntless at empty noises; lofty necked;
  Sharp-headed, barrel-bellied, broadly backed;
  Brawny his chest, and deep; his colour gray;                }
  For beauty, dappled, or the brightest bay:                  }
  Faint white and dun will scarce the rearing pay.            }
    The fiery courser, when he hears from far
  The sprightly trumpets, and the shouts of war,
  Pricks up his ears; and, trembling with delight,
  Shifts place, and paws, and hopes the promised fight.
  On his right shoulder his thick mane reclined,
  Ruffles at speed, and dances in the wind.
  His horny hoofs are jetty black and round;                  }
  His chine is double; starting with a bound                  }
  He turns the turf, and shakes the solid ground.             }
  Fire from his eyes, clouds from his nostrils, flow:
  He bears his rider headlong on the foe.
    Such was the steed in Grecian poets famed,
  Proud Cyllarus, by Spartan Pollux tamed:
  Such coursers bore to fight the god of Thrace;
  And such, Achilles, was thy warlike race.
  In such a shape, grim Saturn did restrain
  His heavenly limbs, and flowed with such a mane,
  When, half-surprised, and fearing to be seen,
  The lecher gallopped from his jealous queen,
  Ran up the ridges of the rocks amain,
  And with shrill neighings filled the neighbouring plain.
    But, worn with years, when dire diseases come,
  Then hide his not ignoble age at home,
  In peace to enjoy his former palms and pains;
  And gratefully be kind to his remains.
  For, when his blood no youthful spirits move,
  He languishes and labours in his love;
  And, when the sprightly seed should swiftly come,
  Dribbling he drudges, and defrauds the womb.
  In vain he burns, like hasty stubble-fires,
  And in himself his former self requires.
    His age and courage weigh; nor those alone,
  But note his father's virtues and his own:
  Observe, if he disdains to yield the prize,
  Of loss impatient, proud of victories.
    Hast thou beheld, when from the goal they start,
  The youthful charioteers with heaving heart
  Rush to the race; and, panting, scarcely bear
  The extremes of feverish hope and chilling fear;
  Stoop to the reins, and lash with all their force?
  The flying chariot kindles in the course:
  And now alow, and now aloft, they fly,
  As borne through air, and seem to touch the sky.
  No stop, no stay: but clouds of sand arise,
  Spurned, and cast backward on the followers' eyes.
  The hindmost blows the foam upon the first:
  Such is the love of praise, an honourable thirst.
    Bold Erichthonius was the first who joined
  Four horses for the rapid race designed,
  And o'er the dusty wheels presiding sate:
  The Lapithæ, to chariots, add the state
  Of bits and bridles: taught the steed to bound,
  To run the ring, and trace the mazy round;
  To stop, to fly, the rules of war to know;
  To obey the rider, and to dare the foe.
    To chuse a youthful steed with courage fired,
  To breed him, break him, back him, are required
  Experienced masters; and, in sundry ways,
  Their labours equal, and alike their praise.
  But, once again, the battered horse beware:
  The weak old stallion will deceive thy care.
  Though famous in his youth for force and speed,             }
  Or was of Argos or Epirian breed,                           }
  Or did from Neptune's race, or from himself, proceed.       }
    These things premised, when now the nuptial time
  Approaches for the stately steed to climb,
  With food enable him to make his court;
  Distend his chine, and pamper him for sport:
  Feed him with herbs, whatever thou canst find,
  Of generous warmth, and of salacious kind:
  Then water him, and (drinking what he can)
  Encourage him to thirst again, with bran.
  Instructed thus, produce him to the fair,
  And join in wedlock to the longing mare.
  For, if the sire be faint, or out of case,
  He will be copied in his famished race,
  And sink beneath the pleasing task assigned:
  (For all's too little for the craving kind.)
    As for the females, with industrious care
  Take down their mettle; keep them lean and bare:
  When conscious of their past delight, and keen
  To take the leap, and prove the sport again,
  With scanty measure then supply their food;
  And, when athirst, restrain them from the flood;
  Their bodies harass; sink them when they run;
  And fry their melting marrow in the sun.
  Starve them, when barns beneath their burden groan,
  And winnowed chaff by western winds is blown;
  For fear the rankness of the swelling womb
  Should scant the passage, and confine the room;
  Lest the fat furrows should the sense destroy
  Of genial lust, and dull the seat of joy.
  But let them suck the seed with greedy force,
  And close involve the vigour of the horse.
    The male has done:[16] thy care must now proceed
  To teeming females, and the promised breed.
  First let them run at large, and never know
  The taming yoke, or draw the crooked plough.
  Let them not leap the ditch, or swim the flood,
  Or lumber o'er the meads, or cross the wood;
  But range the forest, by the silver side
  Of some cool stream, where Nature shall provide
  Green grass and fattening clover for their fare,            }
  And mossy caverns for their noontide lair,                  }
  With rocks above, to shield the sharp nocturnal air.        }
    About the Alburnian groves, with holly green,
  Of winged insects mighty swarms are seen:
  This flying plague (to mark its quality)
  Œstros the Grecians call--Asylus, we--
  A fierce loud-buzzing breeze.--Their stings draw blood,
  And drive the cattle gadding through the wood.
  Seized with unusual pains, they loudly cry:
  Tanagrus hastens thence, and leaves his channel dry.
  This curse the jealous Juno did invent,
  And first employed for Iö's punishment.
  To shun this ill, the cunning leach ordains,
  In summer's sultry heats (for then it reigns)
  To feed the females ere the sun arise,
  Or late at night, when stars adorn the skies.
  When she has calved, then set the dam aside,
  And for the tender progeny provide.
  Distinguish all betimes with branding fire,
  To note the tribe, the lineage, and the sire;
  Whom to reserve for husband of the herd,
  Or who shall be to sacrifice preferred;
  Or whom thou shalt to turn thy glebe allow,
  To smooth the furrows, and sustain the plough:
  The rest, for whom no lot is yet decreed,
  May run in pastures, and at pleasure feed.
  The calf, by nature and by genius made
  To turn the glebe, breed to the rural trade.
  Set him betimes to school; and let him be
  Instructed there in rules of husbandry,
  While yet his youth is flexible and green,
  Nor bad examples of the world has seen.
  Early begin the stubborn child to break;
  For his soft neck, a supple collar make
  Of bending osiers; and (with time and care
  Inured that easy servitude to bear)
  Thy flattering method on the youth pursue:
  Joined with his school-fellows by two and two,
  Persuade them first to lead an empty wheel,
  That scarce the dust can raise, or they can feel:
  In length of time produce the labouring yoke,
  And shining shares, that make the furrows smoke.
  Ere the licentious youth be thus restrained,
  Or moral precepts on their minds have gained,
  Their wanton appetites not only feed
  With delicates of leaves, and marshy weed,
  But with thy sickle reap the rankest land,
  And minister the blade with bounteous hand:
  Nor be with harmful parsimony won
  To follow what our homely sires have done,
  Who filled the pail with beestings of the cow,
  But all her udder to the calf allow.
    If to the warlike steed thy studies bend,
  Or for the prize in chariots to contend,
  Near Pisa's flood the rapid wheels to guide,
  Or in Olympian groves aloft to ride,
  The generous labours of the courser, first,
  Must be with sight of arms and sounds of trumpets nursed;
  Inured the groaning axle-tree to bear,
  And let him clashing whips in stables hear.
  Sooth him with praise, and make him understand
  The loud applauses of his master's hand:
  This, from his weaning, let him well be taught;
  And then betimes in a soft snaffle wrought,
  Before his tender joints with nerves are knit,
  Untried in arms, and trembling at the bit.
  But, when to four full springs his years advance,
  Teach him to run the round, with pride to prance,
  And (rightly managed) equal time to beat,
  To turn, to bound in measure, and curvet.
  Let him to this, with easy pains, be brought,
  And seem to labour, when he labours not.
  Thus formed for speed, he challenges the wind,
  And leaves the Scythian arrow far behind:
  He scours along the field, with loosened reins,
  And treads so light, he scarcely prints the plains;
  Like Boreas in his race, when, rushing forth,
  He sweeps the skies, and clears the cloudy north:
  The waving harvest bends beneath his blast,
  The forest shakes, the groves their honours cast;
  He flies aloft, and with impetuous roar
  Pursues the foaming surges to the shore.
  Thus, o'er the Elean plains, thy well-breathed horse
  Impels the flying car, and wins the course,
  Or, bred to Belgian waggons, leads the way,
  Untired at night, and chearful all the day.
    When once he's broken, feed him full and high;
  Indulge his growth, and his gaunt sides supply.
  Before his training, keep him poor and low;
  For his stout stomach with his food will grow:
  The pampered colt will discipline disdain,
  Impatient of the lash, and restiff to the rein.
    Would'st thou their courage and their strength improve?
  Too soon they must not feel the stings of love.
  Whether the bull or courser be thy care,
  Let him not leap the cow, nor mount the mare.
  The youthful bull must wander in the wood
  Behind the mountain, or beyond the flood,
  Or in the stall at home his fodder find,
  Far from the charms of that alluring kind.
  With two fair eyes his mistress burns his breast:
  He looks, and languishes, and leaves his rest,
  Forsakes his food, and, pining for the lass,
  Is joyless of the grove, and spurns the growing grass.
  The soft seducer, with enticing looks,
  The bellowing rivals to the fight provokes.
    A beauteous heifer in the wood is bred:
  The stooping warriors, aiming head to head,
  Engage their clashing horns: with dreadful sound
  The forest rattles, and the rocks rebound.
  They fence, they push, and, pushing, loudly roar:
  Their dewlaps and their sides are bathed in gore.
  Nor, when the war is over, is it peace;
  Nor will the vanquished bull his claim release;
  But, feeding in his breast his ancient fires,
  And cursing fate, from his proud foe retires.
  Driven from his native land to foreign grounds,
  He with a generous rage resents his wounds,
  His ignominious flight, the victor's boast,
  And, more than both, the loves, which unrevenged he lost.
  Often he turns his eyes, and, with a groan,
  Surveys the pleasing kingdoms, once his own:
  And therefore to repair his strength he tries,              }
  Hardening his limbs with painful exercise,                  }
  And rough upon the flinty rock he lies.                     }
  On prickly leaves and on sharp herbs he feeds,
  Then to the prelude of a war proceeds.
  His horns, yet sore, he tries against a tree,
  And meditates his absent enemy.
  He snuffs the wind; his heels the sand excite;              }
  But, when he stands collected in his might,                 }
  He roars, and promises a more successful fight.             }
  Then, to redeem his honour at a blow,
  He moves his camp, to meet his careless foe.
  Not more with madness, rolling from afar,
  The spumy waves proclaim the watery war,
  And mounting upwards, with a mighty roar,
  March onwards, and insult the rocky shore.
  They mate the middle region with their height,
  And fall no less than with a mountain's weight;
  The waters boil, and, belching, from below
  Black sands, as from a forceful engine, throw.
    Thus every creature, and of every kind,
  The secret joys of sweet coition find,
  Not only man's imperial race, but they
  That wing the liquid air, or swim the sea,
  Or haunt the desert, rush into the flame:
  For Love is lord of all, and is in all the same.
    'Tis with this rage, the mother lion stung,
  Scours o'er the plain, regardless of her young:
  Demanding rites of love, she sternly stalks,
  And hunts her lover in his lonely walks.
  'Tis then the shapeless bear his den forsakes;
  In woods and fields a wild destruction makes:
  Boars whet their tusks; to battle tigers move,
  Enraged with hunger, more enraged with love.
  Then woe to him, that, in the desert land
  Of Libya, travels o'er the burning sand!
  The stallion snuffs the well-known scent afar,
  And snorts and trembles for the distant mare;
  Nor bits nor bridles can his rage restrain,
  And rugged rocks are interposed in vain:
  He makes his way o'er mountains, and contemns
  Unruly torrents, and unforded streams.
  The bristled boar, who feels the pleasing wound,
  New grinds his arming tusks, and digs the ground.
  The sleepy lecher shuts his little eyes;
  About his churning chaps the frothy bubbles rise:
  He rubs his sides against a tree; prepares
  And hardens both his shoulders for the wars.
  What did the youth, when Love's unerring dart
  Transfixed his liver, and inflamed his heart?
  Alone, by night, his watery way he took;
  About him, and above, the billows broke;
  The sluices of the sky were open spread,
  And rolling thunder rattled o'er his head;
  The raging tempest called him back in vain,
  And every boding omen of the main:
  Nor could his kindred, nor the kindly force
  Of weeping parents, change his fatal course;
  No, not the dying maid, who must deplore
  His floating carcase on the Sestian shore.
    I pass the wars that spotted lynxes make
  With their fierce rivals for the female's sake,
  The howling wolves', the mastiffs' amorous rage;
  When even the fearful stag dares for his hind engage.
  But, far above the rest, the furious mare,
  Barred from the male, is frantic with despair:
  For, when her pouting vent declares her pain,
  She tears the harness, and she rends the rein.
  For this (when Venus gave them rage and power)
  Their master's mangled members they devour,
  Of love defrauded in their longing hour.
  For love, they force through thickets of the wood,
  They climb the steepy hills, and stem the flood.
    When, at the spring's approach, their marrow burns,
  (For with the spring their genial warmth returns,)
  The mares to cliffs of rugged rocks repair,
  And with wide nostrils snuff the western air:
  When (wonderous to relate!) the parent wind,
  Without the stallion, propagates the kind.
  Then, fired with amorous rage, they take their flight
  Through plains, and mount the hills' unequal height;
  Nor to the north, nor to the rising sun,
  Nor southward to the rainy regions, run,
  But boring to the west, and hovering there,
  With gaping mouths, they draw prolific air;
  With which impregnate, from their groins they shed
  A slimy juice, by false conception bred.
  The shepherd knows it well, and calls by name
  Hippomanes, to note the mother's flame.
  This, gathered in the planetary hour,
  With noxious weeds, and spelled with words of power,
  Dire stepdames in the magic bowl infuse,
  And mix, for deadly draughts, the poisonous juice.
    But time is lost, which never will renew,                 }
  While we too far the pleasing path pursue,                  }
  Surveying nature with too nice a view.                      }
  Let this suffice for herds: our following care
  Shall woolly flocks and shaggy goats declare.
  Nor can I doubt what oil I must bestow,
  To raise my subject from a ground so low;
  And the mean matter, which my theme affords,
  To embellish with magnificence of words.
  But the commanding Muse my chariot guides,
  Which o'er the dubious cliff securely rides;
  And pleased I am, no beaten road to take,
  But first the way to new discoveries make.
    Now, sacred Pales, in a lofty strain
  I sing the rural honours of thy reign.
  First, with assiduous care from winter keep,
  Well foddered in the stalls, thy tender sheep:
  Then spread with straw the bedding of thy fold,
  With fern beneath, to 'fend the bitter cold;
  That free from gouts thou may'st preserve thy care,
  And clear from scabs, produced by freezing air.
  Next, let thy goats officiously be nursed,
  And led to living streams, to quench their thirst.
  Feed them with winter-browze; and, for their lair,
  A cote, that opens to the south, prepare;
  Where basking in the sun-shine they may lie,
  And the short remnants of his heat enjoy.
  This during winter's drisly reign be done,
  Till the new Ram receives the exalted sun.[17]
  For hairy goats of equal profit are
  With woolly sheep, and ask an equal care.
  'Tis true, the fleece, when drunk with Tyrian juice,
  Is dearly sold; but not for needful use:
  For the salacious goat increases more,
  And twice as largely yields her milky store.
  The still distended udders never fail,
  But, when they seem exhausted, swell the pail.
  Meantime the pastor shears their hoary beards,
  And eases of their hair the loaden herds.
  Their cam'lots, warm in tents, the soldier hold,
  And shield the shivering mariner from cold.
    On shrubs they browze, and, on the bleaky top
  Of rugged hills, the thorny bramble crop.
  Attended with their bleating kids, they come                }
  At night, unasked, and mindful of their home;               }
  And scarce their swelling bags the threshold overcome.      }
  So much the more thy diligence bestow
  In depth of winter, to defend the snow,
  By how much less the tender helpless kind,
  For their own ills, can fit provision find.
  Then minister the browze with bounteous hand,
  And open let thy stacks all winter stand.
  But, when the western winds with vital power
  Call forth the tender grass and budding flower,
  Then, at the last, produce in open air
  Both flocks; and send them to their summer fare.
  Before the sun while Hesperus appears,
  First let them sip from herbs the pearly tears
  Of morning dews, and after break their fast
  On green-sward ground--a cool and grateful taste.
  But, when the day's fourth hour has drawn the dews,
  And the sun's sultry heat their thirst renews;
  When creaking grashoppers on shrubs complain,
  Then lead them to their watering-troughs again.
  In summer's heat, some bending valley find,
  Closed from the sun, but open to the wind;
  Or seek some ancient oak, whose arms extend
  In ample breadth, thy cattle to defend,
  Or solitary grove, or gloomy glade,
  To shield them with its venerable shade.
  Once more to watering lead; and feed again
  When the low sun is sinking to the main,
  When rising Cynthia sheds her silver dews,
  And the cool evening-breeze the meads renews,
  When linnets fill the woods with tuneful sound,
  And hollow shores the halcyon's voice rebound.
    Why should my Muse enlarge on Libyan swains,
  Their scattered cottages, and ample plains,
  Where oft the flocks without a leader stray,                }
  Or through continued deserts take their way,                }
  And, feeding, add the length of night to day?               }
  Whole months they wander, grazing as they go;
  Nor folds nor hospitable harbour know:
  Such an extent of plains, so vast a space
  Of wilds unknown, and of untasted grass,
  Allures their eyes: the shepherd last appears,
  And with him all his patrimony bears,
  His house and household gods, his trade of war,
  His bow and quiver, and his trusty cur.
  Thus, under heavy arms, the youth of Rome
  Their long laborious marches overcome,
  Cheerly their tedious travels undergo,
  And pitch their sudden camp before the foe.
    Not so the Scythian shepherd tends his fold,
  Nor he who bears in Thrace the bitter cold,
  Nor he who treads the bleak Mæotian strand,
  Or where proud Ister rolls his yellow sand.
  Early they stall their flocks and herds; for there
  No grass the fields, no leaves the forests, wear:
  The frozen earth lies buried there, below                   }
  A hilly heap, seven cubits deep in snow;                    }
  And all the west allies of stormy Boreas blow.              }
    The sun from far peeps with a sickly face,
  Too weak the clouds and mighty fogs to chase,
  When up the skies he shoots his rosy head,
  Or in the ruddy ocean seeks his bed.
  Swift rivers are with sudden ice constrained;
  And studded wheels are on its back sustained,
  A hostry now for waggons, which before
  Tall ships of burden on its bosom bore.
  The brazen cauldrons with the frost are flawed;
  The garment, stiff with ice, at hearths is thawed;
  With axes first they cleave the wine; and thence,
  By weight, the solid portions they dispense.
  From locks uncombed, and from the frozen beard,
  Long icicles depend, and crackling sounds are heard,
  Meantime perpetual sleet, and driving snow,
  Obscure the skies, and hang on herds below.
  The starving cattle perish in their stalls;
  Huge oxen stand inclosed in wintery walls
  Of snow congealed; whole herds are buried there
  Of mighty stags, and scarce their horns appear.
  The dexterous huntsman wounds not these afar
  With shafts or darts, or makes a distant war
  With dogs, or pitches toils to stop their flight,
  But close engages in unequal fight;
  And, while they strive in vain to make their way
  Through hills of snow, and pitifully bray,
  Assaults with dint of sword, or pointed spears,
  And homeward, on his back, the joyful burden bears.
  The men to subterranean caves retire,
  Secure from cold, and crowd the cheerful fire:
  With trunks of elms and oaks the hearth they load,
  Nor tempt the inclemency of heaven abroad.
  Their jovial nights in frolics and in play
  They pass, to drive the tedious hours away,
  And their cold stomachs with crowned goblets cheer
  Of windy cyder, and of barmy beer.
  Such are the cold Rhipæan race, and such
  The savage Scythian, and unwarlike Dutch,
  Where skins of beasts the rude barbarians wear,
  The spoils of foxes, and the furry bear.
    Is wool thy care? Let not thy cattle go
  Where bushes are, where burs and thistles grow;
  Nor in too rank a pasture let them feed;
  Then of the purest white select thy breed.
  Even though a snowy ram thou shalt behold,
  Prefer him not in haste for husband to thy fold:
  But search his mouth; and, if a swarthy tongue
  Is underneath his humid palate hung,
  Reject him, lest he darken all the flock,
  And substitute another from thy stock.
  'Twas thus, with fleeces milky white, (if we
  May trust report,) Pan, god of Arcady,
  Did bribe thee, Cynthia; nor didst thou disdain,
  When called in woody shades, to cure a lover's pain.
    If milk be thy design, with plenteous hand
  Bring clover-grass; and from the marshy land
  Salt herbage for the foddering rack provide,
  To fill their bags, and swell the milky tide.
  These raise their thirst, and to the taste restore
  The savour of the salt, on which they fed before.
    Some, when the kids their dams too deeply drain,
  With gags and muzzles their soft mouths restrain.
  Their morning milk the peasants press at night;
  Their evening meal, before the rising light,
  To market bear; or sparingly they steep
  With seasoning salt, and stored for winter keep.
    Nor, last, forget thy faithful dogs; but feed
  With fattening whey the mastiffs' generous breed,
  And Spartan race, who, for the fold's relief,
  Will prosecute with cries the nightly thief,
  Repulse the prowling wolf, and hold at bay
  The mountain robbers rushing to the prey.
  With cries of hounds, thou may'st pursue the fear
  Of flying hares, and chase the fallow deer,
  Rouze from their desert dens the bristled rage
  Of boars, and beamy stags in toils engage.
    With smoke of burning cedar scent thy walls,
  And fume with stinking galbanum thy stalls,
  With that rank odour from thy dwelling-place
  To drive the viper's brood, and all the venomed race:
  For often, under stalls unmoved, they lie,
  Obscure in shades, and shunning heaven's broad eye:
  And snakes, familiar, to the hearth succeed,
  Disclose their eggs, and near the chimney breed--
  Whether to roofy houses they repair,
  Or sun themselves abroad in open air,
  In all abodes, of pestilential kind
  To sheep and oxen, and the painful hind.
  Take, shepherd, take a plant of stubborn oak,
  And labour him with many a sturdy stroke,
  Or with hard stones demolish from afar
  His haughty crest, the seat of all the war;
  Invade his hissing throat, and winding spires;
  Till, stretched in length, the unfolded foe retires.
  He drags his tail, and for his head provides,               }
  And in some secret cranny slowly glides;                    }
  But leaves exposed to blows his back and battered sides.    }
    In fair Calabria's woods a snake is bred,
  With curling crest, and with advancing head:
  Waving he rolls, and makes a winding track;
  His belly spotted, burnished is his back.
  While springs are broken, while the southern air
  And dropping heavens the moistened earth repair,
  He lives on standing lakes and trembling bogs,
  And fills his maw with fish, or with loquacious frogs:
  But when, in muddy pools, the water sinks,
  And the chapt earth is furrowed o'er with chinks,
  He leaves the fens, and leaps upon the ground,
  And, hissing, rolls his glaring eyes around.
  With thirst inflamed, impatient of the heats,
  He rages in the fields, and wide destruction threats.
  Oh! let not sleep my closing eyes invade
  In open plains, or in the secret shade,
  When he, renewed in all the speckled pride
  Of pompous youth, has cast his slough aside,
  And in his summer livery rolls along,                       }
  Erect, and brandishing his forky tongue,                    }
  Leaving his nest, and his imperfect young,                  }
  And thoughtless of his eggs, forgets to rear
  The hopes of poison for the following year.
    The causes and the signs shall next be told,
  Of every sickness that infects the fold.
  A scabby tetter on their pelts will stick,
  When the raw rain has pierced them to the quick,
  Or searching frosts have eaten through the skin,
  Or burning icicles are lodged within;
  Or, when the fleece is shorn, if sweat remains
  Unwashed, and soaks into their empty veins;
  When their defenceless limbs the brambles tear,
  Short of their wool, and naked from the shear.
  Good shepherds, after shearing, drench their sheep:         }
  And their flock's father (forced from high to leap)         }
  Swims down the stream, and plunges in the deep.             }
  They oint their naked limbs with mothered oil;
  Or, from the founts where living sulphurs boil,
  They mix a med'cine to foment their limbs,
  With scum that on the molten silver swims;
  Fat pitch, and black bitumen, add to these,                 }
  Besides the waxen labour of the bees,                       }
  And hellebore, and squills deep-rooted in the seas.         }
  Receipts abound; but, searching all thy store,
  The best is still at hand, to lance the sore,
  And cut the head; for, till the core be found,
  The secret vice is fed, and gathers ground,
  While, making fruitless moan, the shepherd stands,          }
  And, when the lancing-knife requires his hands,             }
  Vain help, with idle prayers, from heaven demands.          }
  Deep in their bones when fevers fix their seat,
  And rack their limbs, and lick the vital heat,
  The ready cure to cool the raging pain
  Is underneath the foot to breathe a vein.
  This remedy the Scythian shepherds found:
  The inhabitants of Thracia's hilly ground,
  And Gelons, use it, when for drink and food
  They mix their crudled milk with horses' blood.
    But, where thou seest a single sheep remain
  In shades aloof, or couched upon the plain,
  Or listlessly to crop the tender grass,
  Or late to lag behind with truant pace;
  Revenge the crime, and take the traitor's head,
  Ere in the faultless flock the dire contagion spread.
    On winter seas we fewer storms behold,
  Than foul diseases that infect the fold.
  Nor do those ills on single bodies prey,                    }
  But oftener bring the nation to decay,                      }
  And sweep the present stock and future hope away.           }
    A dire example of this truth appears,
  When, after such a length of rolling years,
  We see the naked Alps, and thin remains                       }
  Of scattered cots, and yet unpeopled plains,                  }
  Once filled with grazing flocks, the shepherds' happy reigns. }
    Here, from the vicious air and sickly skies,
  A plague did on the dumb creation rise:
  During the autumnal heats the infection grew,
  Tame cattle and the beasts of nature slew,
  Poisoning the standing lakes, and pools impure;
  Nor was the foodful grass in fields secure.
  Strange death! for, when the thirsty fire had drunk
  Their vital blood, and the dry nerves were shrunk,
  When the contracted limbs were cramped, even then
  A waterish humour swelled and oozed again,
  Converting into bane the kindly juice,
  Ordained by Nature for a better use.
  The victim ox, that was for altars prest,
  Trimmed with white ribbons, and with garlands drest,
  Sunk of himself, without the god's command,
  Preventing the slow sacrificer's hand.
  Or, by the holy butcher if he fell,
  The inspected entrails could no fates foretell;
  Nor, laid on altars, did pure flames arise;
  But clouds of smouldering smoke forbade the sacrifice.
  Scarcely the knife was reddened with his gore,
  Or the black poison stained the sandy floor.
  The thriven calves in meads their food forsake,
  And render their sweet souls before the plenteous rack.
  The fawning dog runs mad; the wheezing swine
  With coughs is choked, and labours from the chine:
  The victor horse, forgetful of his food,
  The palm renounces, and abhors the flood.
  He paws the ground; and on his hanging ears                 }
  A doubtful sweat in clammy drops appears:                   }
  Parched is his hide, and rugged are his hairs.              }
  Such are the symptoms of the young disease;
  But, in time's process, when his pains increase,
  He rolls his mournful eyes; he deeply groans
  With patient sobbing, and with manly moans.
  He heaves for breath; which, from his lungs supplied,
  And fetched from far, distends his labouring side.
  To his rough palate his dry tongue succeeds;
  And ropy gore he from his nostrils bleeds.
  A drench of wine has with success been used,
  And through a horn the generous juice infused,
  Which, timely taken, op'd his closing jaws,
  But, if too late, the patient's death did cause:
  For the too vigorous dose too fiercely wrought,
  And added fury to the strength it brought.
  Recruited into rage, he grinds his teeth
  In his own flesh, and feeds approaching death.
  Ye gods, to better fate good men dispose,
  And turn that impious error on our foes!
    The steer, who to the yoke was bred to bow,
  (Studious of tillage, and the crooked plough,)
  Falls down and dies; and, dying, spews a flood
  Of foamy madness, mixed with clotted blood.
  The clown, who, cursing Providence, repines,
  His mournful fellow from the team disjoins;
  With many a groan forsakes his fruitless care,
  And in the unfinished furrow leaves the share.
  The pining steer, no shades of lofty woods,
  Nor flowery meads, can ease, nor crystal floods
  Rolled from the rock: his flabby flanks decrease;
  His eyes are settled in a stupid peace;
  His bulk too weighty for his thighs is grown,
  And his unwieldy neck hangs drooping down.
  Now what avails his well-deserving toil
  To turn the glebe, or smooth the rugged soil?
  And yet he never supped in solemn state,
  (Nor undigested feasts did urge his fate,)
  Nor day to night luxuriously did join,
  Nor surfeited on rich Campanian wine.
  Simple his beverage, homely was his food,
  The wholesome herbage, and the running flood:
  No dreadful dreams awaked him with affright;
  His pains by day secured his rest by night.
    'Twas then that buffaloes, ill paired, were seen
  To draw the car of Jove's imperial queen,
  For want of oxen; and the labouring swain                   }
  Scratched, with a rake, a furrow for his grain,             }
  And covered with his hand the shallow seed again.           }
  He yokes himself, and up the hilly height,
  With his own shoulders, draws the waggon's weight.
    The nightly wolf, that round the enclosure prowled
  To leap the fence, now plots not on the fold,
  Tamed with a sharper pain. The fearful doe,                 }
  And flying stag, amidst the greyhounds go,                  }
  And round the dwellings roam of man, their fiercer foe.     }
  The scaly nations of the sea profound,
  Like shipwrecked carcases, are driven aground,
  And mighty phocæ, never seen before
  In shallow streams, are stranded on the shore.
  The viper dead within her hole is found:
  Defenceless was the shelter of the ground.
  The water-snake, whom fish and paddocks fed,
  With staring scales lies poisoned in his bed:
  To birds their native heavens contagious prove;
  From clouds they fall, and leave their souls above.
    Besides, to change their pasture 'tis in vain,
  Or trust to physic; physic is their bane.
  The learned leaches in despair depart,
  And shake their heads, desponding of their art.
    Tisiphone, let loose from under ground,
  Majestically pale, now treads the round,
  Before her drives diseases and affright,                    }
  And every moment rises to the sight,                        }
  Aspiring to the skies, encroaching on the light.            }
  The rivers, and their banks, and hills around,
  With lowings and with dying bleats resound.
  At length, she strikes an universal blow;
  To death at once whole herds of cattle go;
  Sheep, oxen, horses, fall; and, heaped on high,
  The differing species in confusion lie,
  'Till, warned by frequent ills, the way they found
  To lodge their loathsome carrion under ground:
  For useless to the currier were their hides;
  Nor could their tainted flesh with ocean tides
  Be freed from filth; nor could Vulcanian flame
  The stench abolish, or the savour tame.
  Nor safely could they shear their fleecy store,
  (Made drunk with poisonous juice, and stiff with gore,)
  Or touch the web: but, if the vest they wear,
  Red blisters rising on their paps appear,
  And flaming carbuncles, and noisome sweat,
  And clammy dews, that loathsome lice beget;
  Till the slow-creeping evil eats his way,
  Consumes the parching-limbs, and makes the life his prey.


FOOTNOTES:

[13] It has been objected to me, that I understood not this
passage of Virgil, because I call Niphates a river, which is a mountain
in Armenia. But the river arising from the same mountain is also called
Niphates; and, having spoken of Nile before, I might reasonably think
that Virgil rather meant to couple two rivers, than a river and a
mountain. DRYDEN.

[14] Dr Carey reads _dropping_; but there is no authority, and
seemingly no necessity, for the change.

[15] Dr Carey reads _conquests_, in the plural; but the word,
in the singular, implies more emphatically a career of victory.

[16] The transition is obscure in Virgil. He began with cows,
then proceeds to treat of horses, now returns to cows. DRYDEN.

[17] Astrologers tell us, that the sun receives his exaltation
in the sign Aries: Virgil perfectly understood both astronomy and
astrology.




GEORGICS.




BOOK IV.

ARGUMENT.

 _Virgil has taken care to raise the subject of each Georgic. In the
 first, he has only dead matter on which to work. In the second, he
 just steps on the world of life, and describes that degree of it which
 is to be found in vegetables. In the third, he advances to animals:
 and, in the last, he singles out the Bee, which may be reckoned the
 most sagacious of them, for his subject._

 _In this Georgic, he shews us what station is most proper for the
 bees, and when they begin to gather honey; how to call them home when
 they swarm; and how to part them when they are engaged in battle. From
 hence he takes occasion to discover their different kinds; and, after
 an excursion, relates their prudent and politic administration of
 affairs, and the several diseases that often rage in their hives, with
 the proper symptoms and remedies of each disease. In the last place,
 he lays down a method of repairing their kind, supposing their whole
 breed lost; and gives at large the history of its invention._

  The gifts of heaven my following song pursues,
  Aërial honey, and ambrosial dews.
  Mæcenas, read this other part, that sings                   }
  Embattled squadrons, and adventurous kings--                }
  A mighty pomp, though made of little things.                }
  Their arms, their arts, their manners, I disclose,
  And how they war, and whence the people rose.
  Slight is the subject, but the praise not small,
  If heaven assist, and Phœbus hear my call.
    First, for thy bees a quiet station find,
  And lodge them under covert of the wind,
  (For winds, when homeward they return, will drive
  The loaded carriers from their evening hive,)
  Far from the cows' and goats' insulting crew,
  That trample down the flowers, and brush the dew.
  The painted lizard, and the birds of prey,
  Foes of the frugal kind, be far away--
  The titmouse, and the pecker's hungry brood,
  And Procne, with her bosom stained in blood:
  These rob the trading citizens, and bear                    }
  The trembling captives through the liquid air,              }
  And for their callow young a cruel feast prepare.           }
  But near a living stream their mansion place,
  Edged round with moss, and tufts of matted grass:
  And plant (the winds' impetuous rage to stop)
  Wild olive trees, or palms, before the busy shop;
  That, when the youthful prince,[18] with proud alarm,
  Calls out the venturous colony to swarm--
  When first their way through yielding air they wing,
  New to the pleasures of their native spring--
  The banks of brooks may make a cool retreat
  For the raw soldiers from the scalding heat,
  And neighbouring trees with friendly shade invite
  The troops, unused to long laborious flight.
  Then o'er the running stream, or standing lake,
  A passage for thy weary people make;
  With osier floats the standing water strow;
  Of massy stones make bridges, if it flow;
  That basking in the sun thy bees may lie,
  And, resting there, their flaggy pinions dry,
  When, late returning home, the laden host
  By raging winds is wrecked upon the coast.
  Wild thyme and savory set around their cell,
  Sweet to the taste, and fragrant to the smell:
  Set rows of rosemary with flowering stem,
  And let the purple violets drink the stream.
    Whether thou build the palace of thy bees
  With twisted osiers, or with barks of trees,
  Make but a narrow mouth: for, as the cold
  Congeals into a lump the liquid gold,
  So 'tis again dissolved by summer's heat
  And the sweet labours both extremes defeat.
  And therefore, not in vain, the industrious kind
  With dauby wax and flowers the chinks have lined,
  And, with their stores of gathered glue, contrive
  To stop the vents and crannies of their hive.
  Not birdlime, or Idæan pitch, produce
  A more tenacious mass of clammy juice.
    Nor bees are lodged in hives alone, but found
  In chambers of their own beneath the ground;
  Their vaulted roofs are hung in pumices,
  And in the rotten trunks of hollow trees.
    But plaster thou the chinky hives with clay,
  And leafy branches o'er their lodgings lay:
  Nor place them where too deep a water flows,                }
  Or where the yew, their pois'nous neighbour, grows;         }
  Nor roast red crabs, to offend the niceness of their nose;  }
  Nor near the steaming stench of muddy ground;              }
  Nor hollow rocks that render back the sound,               }
  And doubled images of voice rebound.                       }
  For what remains, when golden suns appear,
  And under earth have driven the winter year,
  The winged nation wanders through the skies,
  And o'er the plains and shady forest flies;
  Then, stooping on the meads and leafy bowers,
  They skim the floods, and sip the purple flowers.
  Exalted hence, and drunk with secret joy,
  Their young succession all their cares employ:
  They breed, they brood, instruct and educate,
  And make provision for the future state;
  They work their waxen lodgings in their hives,
  And labour honey to sustain their lives.
  But when thou seest a swarming cloud arise,
  That sweeps aloft, and darkens all the skies,
  The motions of their hasty flight attend;
  And know, to floods or woods, their airy march they bend.
  Then melfoil beat, and honey-suckles pound;                 }
  With these alluring savours strew the ground;               }
  And mix with tinkling brass the cymbal's droning sound.     }
  Straight to their ancient cells, recalled from air,
  The reconciled deserters will repair.
  But, if intestine broils alarm the hive,
  (For two pretenders oft for empire strive,)
  The vulgar in divided factions jar;
  And murmuring sounds proclaim the civil war.
  Inflamed with ire, and trembling with disdain,
  Scarce can their limbs their mighty souls contain.
  With shouts, the coward's courage they excite,
  And martial clangors call them out to fight;
  With hoarse alarms the hollow camp rebounds,
  That imitate the trumpet's angry sounds;
  Then to their common standard they repair;
  The nimble horsemen scour the fields of air;
  In form of battle drawn, they issue forth,
  And every knight is proud to prove his worth.
  Prest for their country's honour, and their king's,         }
  On their sharp beaks they whet their pointed stings,        }
  And exercise their arms, and tremble with their wings.      }
  Full in the midst the haughty monarchs ride;              }
  The trusty guards come up, and close the side;            }
  With shouts the daring foe to battle is defied.           }
  Thus, in the season of unclouded spring,
  To war they follow their undaunted king,
  Crowd through their gates, and, in the fields of light,
  The shocking squadrons meet in mortal fight.
  Headlong they fall from high, and, wounded, wound,
  And heaps of slaughtered soldiers bite the ground.
  Hard hailstones lie not thicker on the plain,
  Nor shaken oaks such showers of acorns rain.
  With gorgeous wings, the marks of sovereign sway,
  The two contending princes make their way;
  Intrepid through the midst of danger go,
  Their friends encourage and amaze the foe.
  With mighty souls in narrow bodies prest,
  They challenge, and encounter breast to breast;
  So fixed on fame, unknowing how to fly,
  And obstinately bent to win or die,
  That long the doubtful combat they maintain,
  Till one prevails--for one can only reign.
  Yet all these dreadful deeds, this deadly fray,             }
  A cast of scattered dust will soon allay,                   }
  And undecided leave the fortune of the day.                 }
  When both the chiefs are sundered from the fight,
  Then to the lawful king restore his right;
  And let the wasteful prodigal be slain,
  That he, who best deserves, alone may reign.
  With ease distinguished is the regal race:
  One monarch wears an honest open face;
  Shaped to his size, and godlike to behold,
  His royal body shines with specks of gold,
  And ruddy scales; for empire he designed,
  Is better born, and of a nobler kind.
  That other looks like nature in disgrace:                   }
  Gaunt are his sides, and sullen is his face;                }
  And like their grisly prince appear his gloomy race,        }
  Grim, ghastly, rugged, like a thirsty train               }
  That long have travelled through a desert plain,          }
  And spit from their dry chaps the gathered dust again.    }
  The better brood, unlike the bastard crew,
  Are marked with royal streaks of shining hue;
  Glittering and ardent, though in body less:
  From these, at pointed seasons, hope to press
  Huge heavy honeycombs, of golden juice,
  Not only sweet, but pure, and fit for use,
  To allay the strength and hardness of the wine,
  And with old Bacchus new metheglin join.
    But, when the swarms are eager of their play,
  And loath their empty hives, and idly stray,
  Restrain the wanton fugitives, and take
  A timely care to bring the truants back.
  The task is easy--but to clip the wings
  Of their high-flying arbitrary kings.
  At their command, the people swarm away:
  Confine the tyrant, and the slaves will stay.
    Sweet gardens, full of saffron flowers, invite
  The wandering gluttons, and retard their flight--
  Besides the god obscene, who frights away,
  With his lath sword, the thieves and birds of prey
  With his own hand, the guardian of the bees,
  For slips of pines may search the mountain trees,
  And with wild thyme and savory plant the plain,
  Till his hard horny fingers ache with pain;
  And deck with fruitful trees the fields around,
  And with refreshing waters drench the ground.
    Now, did I not so near my labours end,                    }
  Strike sail, and hastening to the harbour tend,             }
  My song to flowery gardens might extend--                   }
  To teach the vegetable arts, to sing
  The Pæstan roses, and their double spring;
  How succory drinks the running streams, and how
  Green beds of parsley near the river grow;
  How cucumbers along the surface creep,
  With crooked bodies, and with bellies deep--
  The late narcissus, and the winding trail
  Of bear's-foot, myrtles green, and ivy pale:
  For, where with stately towers Tarentum stands,
  And deep Galæsus soaks the yellow sands,
  I chanced an old Corycian swain to know,                    }
  Lord of few acres, and those barren too,                    }
  Unfit for sheep or vines, and more unfit to sow;            }
  Yet, labouring well his little spot of ground,
  Some scattering pot-herbs here and there he found,
  Which, cultivated with his daily care,
  And bruised with vervain, were his frugal fare.
  Sometimes white lilies did their leaves afford,
  With wholsome poppy-flowers, to mend his homely board;
  For, late returning home, he supped at ease,                }
  And wisely deemed the wealth of monarchs less;              }
  The little of his own, because his own, did please.         }
  To quit his care, he gathered, first of all,
  In spring the roses, apples in the fall;
  And, when cold winter split the rocks in twain,
  And ice the running rivers did restrain,
  He stripped the bear's-foot of its leafy growth,
  And, calling western winds, accused the spring of sloth.
  He therefore first among the swains was found               }
  To reap the product of his laboured ground,                 }
  And squeeze the combs with golden liquor crowned.           }
  His limes were first in flowers; his lofty pines,
  With friendly shade, secured his tender vines.
  For every bloom his trees in spring afford,
  An autumn apple was by tale restored.
  He knew to rank his elms in even rows,                      }
  For fruit the grafted pear-tree to dispose,                 }
  And tame to plums the sourness of the sloes.                }
  With spreading planes he made a cool retreat,
  To shade good fellows from the summer's heat.
  But, straitened in my space, I must forsake
  This task, for others afterwards to take.
    Describe we next the nature of the bees,
  Bestowed by Jove for secret services,
  When, by the tinkling sound of timbrels led,
  The king of heaven in Cretan caves they fed.
  Of all the race of animals, alone
  The bees have common cities of their own,
  And common sons; beneath one law they live,
  And with one common stock their traffic drive.
  Each has a certain home, a several stall;
  All is the state's, the state provides for all.
  Mindful of coming cold, they share the pain,
  And hoard, for winter's use, the summer's gain.
  Some o'er the public magazines preside,
  And some are sent new forage to provide;
  These drudge in fields abroad, and those at home            }
  Lay deep foundations for the laboured comb,                 }
  With dew, narcissus-leaves, and clammy gum.                 }
  To pitch the waxen flooring some contrive;
  Some nurse the future nation of the hive;
  Sweet honey some condense; some purge the grout;
  The rest, in cells apart, the liquid nectar shut:
  All, with united force, combine to drive
  The lazy drones from the laborious hive:
  With envy stung, they view each other's deeds;
  With diligence the fragrant work proceeds.
  As, when the Cyclops, at the almighty nod,
  New thunder hasten for their angry god,
  Subdued in fire the stubborn metal lies;
  One brawny smith the puffing bellows plies,
  And draws and blows reciprocating air:
  Others to quench the hissing mass prepare;
  With lifted arms they order every blow,                     }
  And chime their sounding hammers in a row;                  }
  With laboured anvils Ætna groans below.                     }
  Strongly they strike; huge flakes of flames expire;
  With tongs they turn the steel, and vex it in the fire.
  If little things with great we may compare,
  Such are the bees, and such their busy care;
  Studious of honey, each in his degree,
  The youthful swain, the grave experienced bee--
  That in the field; this, in affairs of state
  Employed at home, abides within the gate,
  To fortify the combs, to build the wall,
  To prop the ruins, lest the fabric fall:
  But, late at night, with weary pinions come
  The labouring youth, and heavy laden, home.
  Plains, meads, and orchards, all the day he plies;
  The gleans of yellow thyme distend his thighs:
  He spoils the saffron flowers; he sips the blues
  Of violets, wilding blooms, and willow dews.
  Their toil is common, common is their sleep;
  They shake their wings when morn begins to peep,
  Rush through the city-gates without delay,
  Nor ends their work, but with declining day.
  Then, having spent the last remains of light,
  They give their bodies due repose at night,
  When hollow murmurs of their evening bells
  Dismiss the sleepy swains, and toll them to their cells.
  When once in beds their weary limbs they steep,
  No buzzing sounds disturb their golden sleep:
  'Tis sacred silence all. Nor dare they stray,
  When rain is promised, or a stormy day;
  But near the city walls their watering take,
  Nor forage far, but short excursions make.
    And as, when empty barks on billows float,
  With sandy ballast sailors trim the boat;
  So bees bear gravel-stones, whose poising weight
  Steers through the whistling winds their steady flight.
    But (what's more strange) their modest appetites,
  Averse from Venus, fly the nuptial rites.
  No lust enervates their heroic mind,
  Nor wastes their strength on wanton womankind;
  But in their mouths reside their genial powers:
  They gather children from the leaves and flowers.
  Thus make they kings to fill the regal seat,                }
  And thus their little citizens create,                      }
  And waxen cities build, the palaces of state.               }
  And oft on rocks their tender wings they tear,
  And sink beneath the burdens which they bear:
  Such rage of honey in their bosom beats,
  And such a zeal they have for flowery sweets.
    Thus[19] though the race of life they quickly run,
  Which in the space of seven short years is done,
  The immortal line in sure succession reigns;                }
  The fortune of the family remains,                          }
  And grandsires' grandsires[20] the long list contains.      }
    Besides, not Egypt, India, Media, more,
  With servile awe, their idol king adore:
  While he survives, in concord and content                   }
  The commons live, by no divisions rent;                     }
  But the great monarch's death dissolves the government.     }
  All goes to ruin; they themselves contrive
  To rob the honey, and subvert the hive.
  The king presides, his subjects' toil surveys.
  The servile rout their careful Cæsar praise:
  Him they extol: they worship him alone;
  They crowd his levees, and support his throne:
  They raise him on their shoulders with a shout;
  And, when their sovereign's quarrel calls them out,
  His foes to mortal combat they defy,
  And think it honour at his feet to die.
    Induced by such examples, some have taught,
  That bees have portions of ethereal thought--
  Endued with particles of heavenly fires;
  For God the whole created mass inspires.
  Through heaven, and earth, and ocean's depth, he throws
  His influence round, and kindles as he goes.
  Hence flocks, and herds, and men, and beasts, and fowls,
  With breath are quickened, and attract their souls;
  Hence take the forms his prescience did ordain,
  And into him at length resolve again.
  No room is left for death: they mount the sky,
  And to their own congenial planets fly.
    Now, when thou hast decreed to seize their stores,
  And by prerogative to break their doors,
  With sprinkled water first the city choke,
  And then pursue the citizens with smoke.
  Two honey-harvests fall in every year:
  First, when the pleasing Pleiades appear,
  And, springing upward, spurn the briny seas:
  Again, when their affrighted choir surveys
  The watery Scorpion mend his pace behind,                   }
  With a black train of storms, and winter wind,              }
  They plunge into the deep, and safe protection find.        }
  Prone to revenge, the bees, a wrathful race,
  When once provoked, assault the aggressor's face,
  And through the purple veins a passage find;
  There fix their stings, and leave their souls behind.
    But, if a pinching winter thou foresee,
  And would'st preserve thy famished family;
  With fragrant thyme the city fumigate,
  And break the waxen walls to save the state.
  For lurking lizards often lodge, by stealth,
  Within the suburbs, and purloin their wealth;
  And worms, that shun the light,[21] a dark retreat
  Have found in combs, and undermined the seat;
  Or lazy drones, without their share of pain,
  In winter-quarters free, devour the gain;
  Or wasps infest the camp with loud alarms,
  And mix in battle with unequal arms;
  Or secret moths are there in silence fed;
  Or spiders in the vault their snary webs have spread.
    The more oppressed by foes, or famine-pined,
  The more increase thy care to save the sinking kind:
  With greens and flowers recruit their empty hives,
  And seek fresh forage to sustain their lives.
    But, since they share with man one common fate,
  In health and sickness, and in turns of state,--
  Observe the symptoms. When they fall away,
  And languish with insensible decay,
  They change their hue; with haggard eyes they stare;
  Lean are their looks, and shagged is their hair:
  And crowds of dead, that never must return                  }
  To their loved hives, in decent pomp are borne:             }
  Their friends attend the hearse; the next relations mourn.  }
  The sick, for air, before the portal gasp,
  Their feeble legs within each other clasp,
  Or idle in their empty hives remain,
  Benumbed with cold, and listless of their gain.
  Soft whispers then, and broken sounds, are heard,
  As when the woods by gentle winds are stirred;
  Such stifled noise as the close furnace hides,
  Or dying murmurs of departing tides.
  This when thou seest, galbanean odours use,
  And honey in the sickly hive infuse.
  Through reeden pipes convey the golden flood,
  To invite the people to their wonted food.
  Mix it with thickened juice of sodden wines,
  And raisins from the grapes of Psythian vines:
  To these add pounded galls, and roses dry,
  And, with Cecropian thyme, strong-scented centaury.
    A flower there is, that grows in meadow-ground,
  Amellus called, and easy to be found;
  For, from one root, the rising stem bestows
  A wood of leaves, and violet-purple boughs:
  The flower itself is glorious to behold,
  And shines on altars like refulgent gold--
  Sharp to the taste--by shepherds near the stream
  Of Mella found; and thence they gave the name.
  Boil this restoring root in generous wine,
  And set beside the door, the sickly stock to dine.
  But, if the labouring kind be wholly lost,
  And not to be retrieved with care or cost;
  'Tis time to touch the precepts of an art,
  The Arcadian master did of old impart;
  And how he stocked his empty hives again,
  Renewed with putrid gore of oxen slain.
  An ancient legend I prepare to sing,
  And upward follow Fame's immortal spring:--
    For, where with seven-fold horns mysterious Nile
  Surrounds the skirts of Egypt's fruitful isle,
  And where in pomp the sun-burnt people ride,
  On painted barges, o'er the teeming tide,
  Which, pouring down from Ethiopian lands,
  Makes green the soil with slime, and black prolific sands--
  That length of region, and large tract of ground,
  In this one art a sure relief have found.
  First, in a place by nature close, they build
  A narrow flooring, guttered, walled, and tiled.
  In this, four windows are contrived, that strike,
  To the four winds opposed, their beams oblique.
  A steer of two years old they take, whose head
  Now first with burnished horns begins to spread:
  They stop his nostrils, while he strives in vain
  To breathe free air, and struggles with his pain.
  Knocked down, he dies: his bowels, bruised within,
  Betray no wound on his unbroken skin.
  Extended thus, in this obscene abode
  They leave the beast; but first sweet flowers are strowed
  Beneath his body, broken boughs and thyme,
  And pleasing cassia just renewed in prime.
  This must be done, ere spring makes equal day,
  When western winds on curling waters play;
  Ere painted meads produce their flowery crops,
  Or swallows twitter on the chimney-tops.
  The tainted blood, in this close prison pent,
  Begins to boil, and through the bones ferment.
  Then (wonderous to behold) new creatures rise,
  A moving mass at first, and short of thighs;
  'Till, shooting out with legs, and imp'd with wings,
  The grubs proceed to bees with pointed stings;
  And, more and more affecting air, they try
  Their tender pinions, and begin to fly:
  At length, like summer storms from spreading clouds,
  That burst at once, and pour impetuous floods--
  Or flights of arrows from the Parthian bows,
  When from afar they gall embattled foes--
  With such a tempest through the skies they steer,
  And such a form the winged squadrons bear.
    What god, O Muse! this useful science taught?
  Or by what man's experience was it brought?
    Sad Aristæus from fair Tempe fled--                       }
  His bees with famine or diseases dead:--                    }
  On Penëus's banks he stood, and near his holy head;         }
  And, while his falling tears the stream supplied,
  Thus, mourning, to his mother goddess cried:--
  "Mother Cyrene! mother, whose abode
  Is in the depth of this immortal flood!
  What boots it, that from Phœbus' loins I spring,
  The third, by him and thee, from heaven's high king?
  O! where is all thy boasted pity gone,
  And promise of the skies to thy deluded son?
  Why didst thou me, unhappy me, create,
  Odious to gods, and born to bitter fate?
  Whom scarce my sheep, and scarce my painful plough,         }
  The needful aids of human life allow:                       }
  So wretched is thy son, so hard a mother thou!              }
  Proceed, inhuman parent, in thy scorn;                    }
  Root up my trees; with blights destroy my corn;           }
  My vineyards ruin, and my sheepfolds burn.                }
  Let loose thy rage; let all thy spite be shown,
  Since thus thy hate pursues the praises of thy son."
  But, from her mossy bower below the ground,                 }
  His careful mother heard the plaintive sound--              }
  Encompassed with her sea-green sisters round.[22]           }
  One common work they plied; their distaffs full
  With carded locks of blue Milesian wool.
  Spio, with Drymo brown, and Xantho fair,
  And sweet Phyllodoce with long dishevelled hair;
  Cydippe with Lycorias, one a maid,
  And one that once had called Lucina's aid;
  Clio and Beroë, from one father both;
  Both girt with gold, and clad in party-coloured cloth;
  Opis the meek, and Deiopeia proud;
  Nisæa lofty, with Ligea loud;
  Thalia joyous, Ephyre the sad,                              }
  And Arethusa, once Diana's maid,                            }
  But now (her quiver left) to love betrayed.                 }
  To these Clymene the sweet theft declares
  Of Mars; and Vulcan's unavailing cares;
  And all the rapes of gods, and every love,
  From ancient Chaos down to youthful Jove.
    Thus while she sings, the sisters turn the wheel,
  Empty the woolly rock, and fill the reel.
  A mournful sound again the mother hears;
  Again the mournful sound invades the sisters' ears.
  Starting at once from their green seats, they rise--
  Fear in their heart, amazement in their eyes.
  But Arethusa, leaping from her bed,                         }
  First lifts above the waves her beauteous head,             }
  And, crying from afar, thus to Cyrene said:--               }
  "O sister, not with causeless fear possest!
  No stranger voice disturbs thy tender breast.
  'Tis Aristæus, 'tis thy darling son,
  Who to his careless mother makes his moan.
  Near his paternal stream he sadly stands,
  With downcast eyes, wet cheeks, and folded hands,
  Upbraiding heaven from whence his lineage came,
  And cruel calls the gods, and cruel thee, by name."
    Cyrene, moved with love, and seized with fear,
  Cries out,--"Conduct my son, conduct him here:
  'Tis lawful for the youth, derived from gods,
  To view the secrets of our deep abodes."
  At once she waved her hand on either side;
  At once the ranks of swelling streams divide.
   Two rising heaps of liquid crystal stand,
  And leave a space betwixt of empty sand.
  Thus safe received, the downward track he treads,
  Which to his mother's watery palace leads.
  With wondering eyes he views the secret store
  Of lakes, that pent in hollow caverns, roar;
  He hears the crackling sounds of coral woods,
  And sees the secret source of subterranean floods;
  And where, distinguished in their several cells,
  The fount of Phasis, and of Lycus, dwells;
  Where swift Enipeus in his bed appears,
  And Tyber his majestic forehead rears;
  Whence Anio flows, and Hypanis profound
  Breaks through the opposing rocks with raging sound;
  Where Po first issues from his dark abodes,
  And, awful in his cradle, rules the floods:
  Two golden horns on his large front he wears,
  And his grim face a bull's resemblance bears;
  With rapid course he seeks the sacred main,
  And fattens, as he runs, the fruitful plain.
    Now, to the court arrived, the admiring son
  Beholds the vaulted roofs of pory stone,
  Now to his mother goddess tells his grief,
  Which she with pity hears, and promises relief.
  The officious nymphs, attending in a ring,
  With waters drawn from their perpetual spring,
  From earthly dregs his body purify,
  And rub his temples, with fine towels, dry;
  Then load the tables with a liberal feast,
  And honour with full bowls their friendly guest.
  The sacred altars are involved in smoke;
  And the bright choir their kindred gods invoke.
  Two bowls the mother fills with Lydian wine;                }
  Then thus: "Let these be poured, with rites divine,         }
  To the great authors of our watery line--                   }
  To father Ocean, this; and this," she said,               }
  "Be to the nymphs his sacred sisters paid,                }
  Who rule the watery plains, and hold the woodland shade." }
  She sprinkled thrice, with wine, the Vestal fire;
  Thrice to the vaulted roof the flames aspire.
  Raised with so blest an omen, she begun,
  With words, like these, to cheer her drooping son:--
  "In the Carpathian bottom, makes abode
  The shepherd of the seas, a prophet and a god.
  High o'er the main in watery pomp he rides,
  His azure car and finny coursers guides--
  Proteus his name.--To his Pallenian port
  I see from far the weary god resort.
  Him not alone we river gods adore,
  But aged Nereus hearkens to his lore.
  With sure foresight, and with unerring doom,
  He sees what is, and was, and is to come.
  This Neptune gave him, when he gave to keep
  His scaly flocks, that graze the watery deep.
  Implore his aid; for Proteus only knows
  The secret cause, and cure, of all thy woes.
  But first the wily wizard must be caught;                   }
  For, unconstrained, he nothing tells for nought;            }
  Nor is with prayers, or bribes, or flattery bought.         }
  Surprise him first, and with hard fetters bind;
  Then all his frauds will vanish into wind.
  I will myself conduct thee on thy way:
  When next the southing sun inflames the day,
  When the dry herbage thirsts for dews in vain,
  And sheep, in shades, avoid the parching plain;
  Then will I lead thee to his secret seat,                   }
  When, weary with his toil, and scorched with heat,          }
  The wayward sire frequents his cool retreat.                }
  His eyes with heavy slumber overcast--
  With force invade his limbs, and bind him fast.
  Thus surely bound, yet be not over bold:
  The slippery god will try to loose his hold,
  And various forms assume, to cheat thy sight,
  And with vain images of beasts affright;
  With foamy tusks he seems[23] a bristly boar,
  Or imitates the lion's angry roar;
  Breaks out in crackling flames to shun thy snares,
  A dragon hisses, or a tiger stares;
  Or, with a wile thy caution to betray,
  In fleeting streams attempts to slide away.
  But thou, the more he varies forms, beware
  To strain his fetters with a stricter care.
  Till, tiring all his arts, he turns again
  To his true shape, in which he first was seen."
    This said, with nectar she her son anoints,
  Infusing vigour through his mortal joints:
  Down from his head the liquid odours ran;
  He breathed of heaven, and looked above a man.
    Within a mountain's hollow womb, there lies
  A large recess, concealed from human eyes,
  Where heaps of billows, driven by wind and tide,            }
  In form of war, their watery ranks divide,                  }
  And there, like centries set, without the mouth abide:      }
  A station safe for ships, when tempests roar,
  A silent harbour, and a covered shore.
  Secure within resides the various god,
  And draws a rock upon his dark abode.
  Hither with silent steps, secure from sight,                }
  The goddess guides her son, and turns him from the light:   }
  Herself, involved in clouds, precipitates her flight.       }
    'Twas noon; the sultry Dog-star from the sky
  Scorched Indian swains; the rivelled grass was dry;
  The sun with flaming arrows pierced the flood,
  And, darting to the bottom, baked the mud;
  When weary Proteus, from the briny waves,
  Retired for shelter to his wonted caves.
  His finny flocks about their shepherd play,
   And, rolling round him, spirt the bitter sea.
  Unwieldily they wallow first in ooze,
  Then in the shady covert seek repose.
  Himself, their herdsman, on the middle mount,
  Takes of his mustered flocks a just account.
  So, seated on a rock, a shepherd's groom
  Surveys his evening flocks returning home,
  When lowing calves and bleating lambs, from far,
  Provoke the prowling wolf to nightly war.
  The occasion offers, and the youth complies:
  For scarce the weary god had closed his eyes,
  When, rushing on with shouts, he binds in chains
  The drowzy prophet, and his limbs constrains.
  He, not unmindful of his usual art,
  First in dissembled fire attempts to part:
  Then roaring beasts, and running streams, he tries,
  And wearies all his miracles of lies:
  But, having shifted every form to 'scape,
  Convinced of conquest, he resumed his shape,
  And thus, at length, in human accent spoke:--
  "Audacious youth! what madness could provoke
  A mortal man to invade a sleeping god?
  What business brought thee to my dark abode?"
    To this, the audacious youth:--"Thou know'st full well
  My name and business, god; nor need I tell.
  No man can Proteus cheat: but, Proteus, leave
  Thy fraudful arts, and do not thou deceive.
  Following the gods' command, I come to implore
  Thy help, my perished people to restore."
  The seer, who could not yet his wrath assuage,
  Rolled his green eyes, that sparkled with his rage,
  And gnashed his teeth, and cried,--"No vulgar god
  Pursues thy crimes, nor with a common rod.
  Thy great misdeeds have met a due reward;
  And Orpheus' dying prayers at length are heard.[24]
  For crimes, not his, the lover lost his life,
  And at thy hands requires his murdered wife:
  Nor (if the Fates assist not) canst thou 'scape
  The just revenge of that intended rape.
  To shun thy lawless lust, the dying bride,
  Unwary, took along the river's side,
  Nor at her heels perceived the deadly snake,
  That kept the bank, in covert of the brake.
  But all her fellow nymphs the mountains tear
  With loud laments, and break the yielding air:
  The realms of Mars remurmur all around,
  And echoes to the Athenian shores rebound.
  The unhappy husband, husband now no more,                   }
  Did on his tuneful harp his loss deplore,                   }
  And sought his mournful mind with music to restore.         }
  On thee, dear wife, in deserts all alone,                 }
  He called, sighed, sung: his griefs with day begun,       }
  Nor were they finished with the setting sun.              }
  Even to the dark dominions of the night
  He took his way, through forests void of light,
  And dared amidst the trembling ghosts to sing,
  And stood before the inexorable king.
  The infernal troops like passing shadows glide,
  And, listening, crowd the sweet musician's side--
  Not flocks of birds, when driven by storms or night,
  Stretch to the forest with so thick a flight--
  Men, matrons, children, and the unmarried maid,             }
  The mighty hero's more majestic shade,[25]                  }
  And youths, on funeral piles before their parents laid.     }
  All these Cocytus bounds with squalid reeds,
  With muddy ditches, and with deadly weeds;
  And baleful Styx encompasses around,
  With nine slow circling streams, the unhappy ground.
  Even from the depths of hell the damned advance;
  The infernal mansions, nodding, seem to dance;
  The gaping three-mouthed dog forgets to snarl;
  The Furies hearken, and their snakes uncurl;
  Ixion seems no more his pain to feel,
  But leans attentive on his standing wheel.
  All dangers past, at length the lovely bride
  In safety goes, with her melodious guide,
  Longing the common light again to share,
  And draw the vital breath of upper air--
  He first; and close behind him followed she;
  For such was Proserpine's severe decree--
  When strong desires the impatient youth invade,
  By little caution and much love betrayed:
  A fault, which easy pardon might receive,
  Were lovers judges, or could hell forgive:
  For, near the confines of etherial light,
  And longing for the glimmering of a sight,
  The unwary lover cast his eyes behind,
  Forgetful of the law, nor master of his mind.
  Straight all his hopes exhaled in empty smoke,
  And his long toils were forfeit for a look.
  Three flashes of blue lightning gave the sign
  Of covenants broke; three peals of thunder join.
  Then thus the bride:--'What fury seized on thee,
  Unhappy man! to lose thyself and me?
  Dragged back again by cruel destinies,
  An iron slumber shuts my swimming eyes.
  And now, farewell! Involved in shades of night,
  For ever I am ravished from thy sight.
  In vain I reach my feeble hands, to join
  In sweet embraces--ah! no longer thine!'
  She said; and from his eyes the fleeting fair               }
  Retired like subtile smoke dissolved in air,                }
  And left her hopeless lover in despair.                     }
  In vain, with folding arms, the youth essayed
  To stop her flight, and strain the flying shade:
  He prays, he raves, all means in vain he tries,             }
  With rage inflamed, astonished with surprise;               }
  But she returned no more, to bless his longing eyes.        }
  Nor would the infernal ferry-man once more
  Be bribed to waft him to the farther shore
  What should he do, who twice had lost his love?
  What notes invent? what new petitions move?
  Her soul already was consigned to Fate,
  And shivering in the leaky sculler sate.
  For seven continued months, if Fame say true,
  The wretched swain his sorrows did renew:
  By Strymon's freezing streams he sate alone:
  The rocks were moved to pity with his moan:
  Trees bent their heads to hear him sing his wrongs:
  Fierce tigers couched around, and lolled their fawning tongues.
  So, close in poplar shades, her children gone,
  The mother nightingale laments alone,
  Whose nest some prying churl had found, and thence,
  By stealth, conveyed the unfeathered innocence
  But she supplies the night with mournful strains;
  And melancholy music fills the plains.
  Sad Orpheus thus his tedious hours employs,
  Averse from Venus, and from nuptial joys.
  Alone he tempts the frozen floods, alone
  The unhappy climes, where spring was never known:
  He mourned his wretched wife, in vain restored,
  And Pluto's unavailing boon deplored.
  The Thracian matrons--who the youth accused
  Of love disdained, and marriage rites refused--
  With furies and nocturnal orgies fired,
  At length against his sacred life conspired.
  Whom even the savage beasts had spared, they killed,
  And strewed his mangled limbs about the field.
  Then, when his head, from his fair shoulders torn,
  Washed by the waters, was on Hebrus borne,
  Even then his trembling tongue invoked his bride;           }
  With his last voice, 'Eurydice,' he cried.                  }
  'Eurydice,' the rocks and river-banks replied."             }
    This answer Proteus gave; nor more he said              }
  But in the billows plunged his hoary head;                }
  And, where he leaped, the waves in circles widely spread. }
    The nymph returned, her drooping son to cheer,
  And bade him banish his superfluous fear:
  "For now," said she, "the cause is known, from whence
  Thy woe succeeded, and for what offence.
  The nymphs, companions of the unhappy maid,
  This punishment upon thy crimes have laid;
  And sent a plague among thy thriving bees.--
  With vows and suppliant prayers their powers appease:
  The soft Napæan race will soon repent[26]
  Their anger, and remit the punishment.
  The secret in an easy method lies;
  Select four brawny bulls for sacrifice,
  Which on Lycæus graze without a guide;
  Add four fair heifers yet in yoke untried.
  For these, four altars in their temple rear,
  And then adore the woodland powers with prayer.
  From the slain victims pour the streaming blood,
  And leave their bodies in the shady wood:
  Nine mornings thence, Lethæan poppy bring,
  To appease the manes of the poet's[27] king:
  And, to propitiate his offended bride,
  A fatted calf and a black ewe provide:
  This finished, to the former woods repair."                 }
  His mother's precepts he performs with care;                }
  The temple visits, and adores with prayer;                  }
  Four altars raises; from his herd he culls,
  For slaughter, four the fairest of his bulls:
  Four heifers from his female store he took,
  All fair, and all unknowing of the yoke.
  Nine mornings thence, with sacrifice and prayers,
  The powers atoned, he to the grove repairs.
  Behold a prodigy! for, from within
  The broken bowels, and the bloated skin,
  A buzzing noise of bees his ears alarms:
  Straight issue through the sides assembling swarms.
  Dark as a cloud, they make a wheeling flight,
  Then on a neighbouring tree, descending, light:
  Like a large cluster of black grapes they show,
  And make a large dependance from the bough.
    Thus have I sung of fields, and flocks, and trees,
  And of the waxen work of labouring bees;
  While mighty Cæsar, thundering from afar,
  Seeks on Euphrates' banks the spoils of war;
  With conquering arts asserts his country's cause,
  With arts of peace the willing people draws;
  On the glad earth the golden age renews,
  And his great father's path to heaven pursues;
  While I at Naples pass my peaceful days,
  Affecting studies of less noisy praise;
  And, bold through youth, beneath the beechen shade,
  The lays of shepherds, and their loves, have played.


FOOTNOTES:

[18] Note I.

[19] Dr Carey reads, "_through_ the race of life they quickly
run," and has altered the punctuation to the sense thus conveyed; but I
retain the reading of the first edition--_though_--which is clearly the
meaning of Virgil. The original is as follows:

  _Ergo ipsas_ quamvis _angusti terminus ævi
  Excipiat, neque enim plus septima ducitur æstas,
  At genus immortale manet_, &c.

[20] The first edition has _grandsons_.

[21] By the list of _errata_ to the first edition, we are
directed to read, "lizards shunning light;" but as lizards had been
mentioned in the preceding couplet, the correction itself seems
erroneous. I follow Dr Carey in rejecting it.

[22] Note II.

[23] Dr Carey proposes to read _will seem_, according to the
second edition, and to adapt the whole sentence to that construction;
but the present tense seems more poetical, as placing the manœuvres
of Proteus more vividly before Aristæus. If Dryden thought of adopting
the future, he did not complete his purpose. I have therefore followed
the original edition.

[24] Note III.

[25] This whole line is taken from the Marquis of Normanby's
translation.--DRYDEN.

[26] Dr Carey reads _relent_; but _repent_ is here used in
a well known scriptural sense; not as expressing remorse, but simple
pity.

[27] _Poet-king_, in Dr Carey's edition: but the original
edition reads as above.




NOTES ON GEORGICS, IV.


Note I.

  _That, when the youthful prince_--P. 99.

My most ingenious friend, Sir Henry Shere, has observed, through a
glass-hive, that the young prince of the bees, or heir presumptive
of the crown, approaches the king's apartment with great reverence;
and, for three successive mornings, demands permission to lead forth
a colony of that year's bees. If his petition be granted, (which he
seems to make by humble hummings,) the swarm arises under his conduct.
If the answer be, _le roi s'avisera_,--that is, if the old monarch
think it not convenient for the public good to part with so many of
his subjects, the next morning the prince is found dead before the
threshold of the palace.


Note II.

  _Encompassed with her sea-green sisters round._--P. 112.

The poet here records the names of fifteen river-nymphs; and for once
I have translated them all; but, in the Æneïs, I thought not myself
obliged to be so exact; for, in naming many men, who were killed by
heroes, I have omitted some, which would not sound in English verse.


Note III.

  ----_Orpheus' dying prayers at length are heard._--P. 117.

The Episode of Orpheus and Eurydice begins here, and contains the only
machine which Virgil uses in the "Georgics." I have observed, in the
epistle before the Æneïs, that our author seldom employs machines but
to adorn his poem, and that the action which they seemingly perform, is
really produced without them. Of this nature is the legend of the bees
restored by miracle; when the receipt, which the poet gives, would do
the work without one. The only beautiful machine which I remember in
the modern poets, is in Ariosto, where God commands St Michael to take
care, that Paris, then besieged by the Saracens, should be succoured by
Rinaldo. In order to do this, he enjoins the archangel to find Silence
and Discord; the first to conduct the Christian army to relieve the
town, with so much secrecy, that their march should not be discovered;
the latter to enter the camp of the infidels, and there to sow
dissention among the principal commanders. The heavenly messenger takes
his way to an ancient monastery; not doubting there to find Silence in
her primitive abode; but, instead of Silence finds Discord: the monks,
being divided into factions about the choice of some new officer, were
at _snic_ and _snee_ with their drawn knives. The satire needs no
explanation. And here it may be also observed, that ambition, jealousy,
and worldly interest, and point of honour, had made variance both in
the cloister and the camp; and strict discipline had done the work of
Silence, in conducting the Christian army to surprise the Turks.




ÆNEIS.




TO

THE MOST HONOURABLE

JOHN,

LORD MARQUIS OF NORMANBY,

EARL OF MULGRAVE,[28] &c.

AND

KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER.


A heroic poem, truly such, is undoubtedly the greatest work which the
soul of man is capable to perform. The design of it is to form the mind
to heroic virtue by example. It is conveyed in verse, that it may
delight, while it instructs: the action of it is always one, entire,
and great. The least and most trivial episodes, or under-actions,
which are interwoven in it, are parts either necessary or convenient
to carry on the main design; either so necessary, that, without them,
the poem must be imperfect, or so convenient, that no others can be
imagined more suitable to the place in which they are. There is nothing
to be left void in a firm building; even the cavities ought not to be
filled with rubbish, (which is of a perishable kind, destructive to the
strength,) but with brick or stone, though of less pieces, yet of the
same nature, and fitted to the crannies. Even the least portions of
them must be of the epic kind: all things must be grave, majestical,
and sublime; nothing of a foreign nature, like the trifling _novels_,
which Ariosto,[29] and others, have inserted in their poems; by which
the reader is misled into another sort of pleasure, opposite to that
which is designed in an epic poem. One raises the soul, and hardens it
to virtue; the other softens it again, and unbends it into vice.

One conduces to the poet's aim, the completing of his work, which
he is driving on, labouring and hastening in every line; the other
slackens his pace, diverts him from his way, and locks him up, like a
knight-errant, in an enchanted castle, when he should be pursuing his
first adventure. Statius, as Bossu has well observed, was ambitious
of trying his strength with his master Virgil, as Virgil had before
tried his with Homer. The Grecian gave the two Romans an example, in
the games which were celebrated at the funerals of Patroclus. Virgil
imitated the invention of Homer, but changed the sports. But both the
Greek and Latin poet took their occasions from the subject; though, to
confess the truth, they were both ornamental, or, at best, convenient
parts of it, rather than of necessity arising from it. Statius, who,
through his whole poem, is noted for want of conduct and judgment,
instead of staying, as he might have done, for the death of Capaneus,
Hippomedon, Tydeus, or some other of his seven champions, (who are
heroes all alike,) or more properly for the tragical end of the two
brothers, whose exequies the next successor had leisure to perform when
the siege was raised, and in the interval betwixt the poet's first
action and his second--went out of his way, as it were on prepense
malice, to commit a fault. For he took his opportunity to kill a
royal infant by the means of a serpent, (that author of all evil,) to
make way for those funeral honours which he intended for him. Now,
if this innocent had been of any relation to his Thebaïs--if he had
either furthered or hindered the taking of the town--the poet might
have found some sorry excuse at least, for detaining the reader from
the promised siege. On these terms, this Capaneus of a poet engaged
his two immortal predecessors; and his success was answerable to his
enterprise.[30]

If this œconomy must be observed in the minutest parts of an epic
poem, which, to a common reader, seem to be detached from the body,
and almost independent of it; what soul, though sent into the world
with great advantages of nature, cultivated with the liberal arts and
sciences, conversant with histories of the dead, and enriched with
observations on the living, can be sufficient to inform the whole
body of so great a work? I touch here but transiently, without any
strict method, on some few of those many rules of imitating nature,
which Aristotle drew from Homer's Iliads and Odysseys, and which
he fitted to the drama; furnishing himself also with observations
from the practice of the theatre, when it flourished under Æschylus,
Euripides, and Sophocles: for the original of the stage was from the
epic poem. Narration, doubtless, preceded acting, and gave laws to it:
what at first was told artfully, was, in process of time, represented
gracefully to the sight and hearing. Those episodes of Homer, which
were proper for the stage, the poets amplified each into an action;
out of his limbs they formed their bodies; what he had contracted,
they enlarged; out of one Hercules, were made infinity of pygmies,
yet all endued with human souls; for from him, their great creator,
they have each of them the _divinæ particulam auræ_. They flowed from
him at first, and are at last resolved into him. Nor were they only
animated by him, but their measure and symmetry was owing to him. His
one, entire, and great action, was copied by them according to the
proportions of the drama. If he finished his orb within the year, it
sufficed to teach them, that their action being less, and being also
less diversified with incidents, their orb, of consequence, must be
circumscribed in a less compass, which they reduced within the limits
either of a natural or an artificial day; so that, as he taught them to
amplify what he had shortened, by the same rule, applied the contrary
way, he taught them to shorten what he had amplified. Tragedy is the
miniature of human life; an epic poem is the draught at length.[31]
Here, my lord, I must contract also; for, before I was aware, I was
almost running into a long digression, to prove, that there is no such
absolute necessity that the time of a stage action should so strictly
be confined to twenty-four hours, as never to exceed them, for which
Aristotle contends, and the Grecian stage has practised. Some longer
space, on some occasions, I think, may be allowed, especially for
the English theatre, which requires more variety of incidents than
the French. Corneille himself, after long practice, was inclined to
think, that the time allotted by the ancients was too short to raise
and finish a great action: and better a mechanic rule were stretched
or broken, than a great beauty were omitted. To raise, and afterwards
to calm the passions--to purge the soul from pride, by the examples
of human miseries, which befal the greatest--in few words, to expel
arrogance, and introduce compassion, are the great effects of tragedy;
great, I must confess, if they were altogether as true as they are
pompous. But are habits to be introduced at three hours' warning? are
radical diseases so suddenly removed? A mountebank may promise such a
cure, but a skilful physician will not undertake it. An epic poem is
not in so much haste: it works leisurely; the changes which it makes
are slow; but the cure is likely to be more perfect. The effects of
tragedy, as I said, are too violent to be lasting. If it be answered,
that, for this reason, tragedies are often to be seen, and the dose
to be repeated, this is tacitly to confess, that there is more virtue
in one heroic poem, than in many tragedies. A man is humbled one day,
and his pride returns the next. Chemical medicines are observed to
relieve oftener than to cure: for it is the nature of spirits to make
swift impressions, but not deep. Galenical decoctions, to which I may
properly compare an epic poem, have more of body in them; they work by
their substance and their weight. It is one reason of Aristotle's to
prove, that tragedy is the more noble, because it turns in a shorter
compass; the whole action being circumscribed within the space of
four-and-twenty hours. He might prove as well, that a mushroom is to
be preferred before a peach, because it shoots up in the compass of a
night. A chariot may be driven round the pillar in less space than a
large machine, because the bulk is not so great. Is the Moon a more
noble planet than Saturn, because she makes her revolution in less
than thirty days, and he in little less than thirty years? Both their
orbs are in proportion to their several magnitudes; and, consequently,
the quickness or slowness of their motion, and the time of their
circumvolutions, is no argument of the greater or less perfection. And,
besides, what virtue is there in a tragedy, which is not contained
in an epic poem, where pride is humbled, virtue rewarded, and vice
punished; and those more amply treated, than the narrowness of the
drama can admit? The shining quality of an epic hero, his magnanimity,
his constancy, his patience, his piety, or whatever characteristical
virtue his poet gives him, raises first our admiration. We are
naturally prone to imitate what we admire; and frequent acts produce
a habit. If the hero's chief quality be vicious, as, for example, the
choler and obstinate desire of vengeance in Achilles, yet the moral
is instructive: and, besides, we are informed in the very proposition
of the Iliads, that this anger was pernicious; that it brought a
thousand ills on the Grecian camp. The courage of Achilles is proposed
to imitation, not his pride and disobedience to his general, nor
his brutal cruelty to his dead enemy, nor the selling his body to
his father.[32] We abhor these actions while we read them; and what
we abhor, we never imitate. The poet only shews them, like rocks or
quicksands, to be shunned.

By this example, the critics have concluded, that it is not necessary
the manners of the hero should be virtuous. They are poetically good,
if they are of a piece; though, where a character of perfect virtue
is set before us, it is more lovely; for there the whole hero is to
be imitated. This is the Æneas of our author; this is that idea of
perfection in an epic poem, which painters and statuaries have only
in their minds, and which no hands are able to express. These are the
beauties of a god in a human body. When the picture of Achilles is
drawn in tragedy, he is taken with those warts, and moles, and hard
features, by those who represent him on the stage, or he is no more
Achilles; for his creator, Homer, has so described him. Yet even thus
he appears a perfect hero, though an imperfect character of virtue.
Horace paints him after Homer, and delivers him to be copied on the
stage with all those imperfections.[33] Therefore they are either not
faults in a heroic poem, or faults common to the drama. After all,
on the whole merits of the cause, it must be acknowledged, that the
epic poem is more for the manners, and tragedy for the passions. The
passions, as I have said, are violent; and acute distempers require
medicines of a strong and speedy operation. Ill habits of the mind
are like chronical diseases, to be corrected by degrees, and cured by
alteratives; wherein, though purges are sometimes necessary, yet diet,
good air, and moderate exercise, have the greatest part. The matter
being thus stated, it will appear, that both sorts of poetry are of
use for their proper ends. The stage is more active; the epic poem
works at greater leisure, yet is active too, when need requires; for
dialogue is imitated by the drama, from the more active parts of it.
One puts off a fit, like the _quinquina_, and relieves us only for a
time; the other roots out the distemper, and gives a healthful habit.
The sun enlightens and cheers us, dispels fogs, and warms the ground
with his daily beams; but the corn is sowed, increases, is ripened,
and is reaped for use in process of time, and in its proper season.
I proceed, from the greatness of the action, to the dignity of the
actors; I mean to the persons employed in both poems. There likewise
tragedy will be seen to borrow from the epopee; and that which borrows
is always of less dignity, because it has not of its own. A subject, it
is true, may lend to his sovereign; but the act of borrowing makes the
king inferior, because he wants, and the subject supplies. And suppose
the persons of the drama wholly fabulous, or of the poet's invention,
yet heroic poetry gave him the examples of that invention, because it
was first, and Homer the common father of the stage. I know not of any
one advantage which tragedy can boast above heroic poetry, but that
it is represented to the view, as well as read, and instructs in the
closet, as well as on the theatre. This is an uncontended excellence,
and a chief branch of its prerogative; yet I may be allowed to say,
without partiality, that herein the actors share the poet's praise.
Your lordship knows some modern tragedies which are beautiful on the
stage, and yet I am confident you would not read them. "Tryphon the
stationer"[34] complains, they are seldom asked for in his shop. The
poet who flourished in the scene, is damned in the _ruelle_;[35] nay
more, he is not esteemed a good poet by those, who see and hear his
extravagancies with delight. They are a sort of stately fustian, and
lofty childishness. Nothing but nature can give a sincere pleasure;
where that is not imitated, it is grotesque painting; "the fine woman
ends in a fishes tail."

I might also add, that many things, which not only please, but are
real beauties in the reading, would appear absurd upon the stage;
and those not only the _speciosa miracula_, as Horace calls them, of
transformations, of Scylla, Antiphates, and the Læstrygons, which
cannot be represented even in operas; but the prowess of Achilles or
Æneas would appear ridiculous in our dwarf-heroes of the theatre. We
can believe they routed armies, in Homer or in Virgil; but _ne Hercules
contra duos_ in the drama. I forbear to instance in many things, which
the stage cannot, or ought not to represent; for I have said already
more than I intended on this subject, and should fear it might be
turned against me, that I plead for the pre-eminence of epic poetry,
because I have taken some pains in translating Virgil, if this were the
first time that I had delivered my opinion in this dispute. But I have
more than once already maintained the rights of my two masters against
their rivals of the scene,[36] even while I wrote tragedies myself,
and had no thoughts of this present undertaking. I submit my opinion
to your judgement, who are better qualified than any man I know, to
decide this controversy. You come, my lord, instructed in the cause,
and needed not that I should open it. Your "Essay of Poetry,"[37] which
was published without a name, and of which I was not honoured with the
confidence, I read over and over with much delight, and as much
instruction, and, without flattering you, or making myself more moral
than I am--not without some envy. I was loth to be informed how an
epic poem should be written, or how a tragedy should be contrived and
managed, in better verse, and with more judgment, than I could teach
others. A native of Parnassus, and bred up in the studies of its
fundamental laws, may receive new lights from his contemporaries; but
it is a grudging kind of praise which he gives his benefactors. He is
more obliged, than he is willing to acknowledge; there is a tincture of
malice in his commendations; for where I own I am taught, I confess my
want of knowledge. A judge upon the bench may, out of good nature, or
at least interest, encourage the pleadings of a puny counsellor; but he
does not willingly commend his brother serjeant at the bar, especially
when he controuls his law, and exposes that ignorance which is made
sacred by his place. I gave the unknown author his due commendation, I
must confess; but who can answer for me, and for the rest of the poets
who heard me read the poem, whether we should not have been better
pleased to have seen our own names at the bottom of the title-page?
Perhaps we commended it the more, that we might seem to be above the
censure. We are naturally displeased with an unknown critic, as the
ladies are with a lampooner, because we are bitten in the dark, and
know not where to fasten our revenge. But great excellencies will work
their way through all sorts of opposition. I applauded rather out of
decency, than affection; and was ambitious, as some yet can witness,
to be acquainted with a man, with whom I had the honour to converse,
and that almost daily, for so many years together. Heaven knows, if I
have heartily forgiven you this deceit. You extorted a praise, which
I should willingly have given, had I known you. Nothing had been more
easy, than to commend a patron of a long standing. The world would
join with me, if the encomiums were just; and, if unjust, would excuse
a grateful flatterer. But to come anonymous upon me, and force me to
commend you against my interest, was not altogether so fair, give me
leave to say, as it was politic; for, by concealing your quality,
you might clearly understand how your work succeeded, and that the
general approbation was given to your merit, not your titles. Thus,
like Apelles, you stood unseen behind your own Venus, and received
the praises of the passing multitude; the work was commended, not the
author; and I doubt not, this was one of the most pleasing adventures
of your life.[38]

I have detained your lordship longer than I intended in this dispute
of preference betwixt the epic poem and the drama, and yet have not
formally answered any of the arguments which are brought by Aristotle
on the other side, and set in the fairest light by Dacier. But I
suppose, without looking on the book, I may have touched on some of
the objections; for, in this address to your lordship, I design not
a treatise of heroic poetry, but write in a loose epistolary way,
somewhat tending to that subject, after the example of Horace, in his
First Epistle of the Second Book to Augustus Cæsar, and in that to the
Piso's, which we call his "Art of Poetry;" in both of which he observes
no method that I can trace, whatever Scaliger the father, or Heinsius,
may have seen, or rather think they had seen. I have taken up, laid
down, and resumed as often as I pleased, the same subject; and this
loose proceeding I shall use through all this prefatory dedication. Yet
all this while I have been sailing with some side-wind or other toward
the point I proposed in the beginning,--the greatness and excellency of
a heroic poem, with some of the difficulties which attend that work.
The comparison, therefore, which I made betwixt the epopee and the
tragedy, was not altogether a digression; for it is concluded on all
hands, that they are both the master-pieces of human wit.

In the mean time, I may be bold to draw this corollary from what has
been already said, that the file of heroic poets is very short; all are
not such who have assumed that lofty title in ancient or modern ages,
or have been so esteemed by their partial and ignorant admirers.

There have been but one great Ilias, and one Æneïs, in so many
ages. The next, but the next with a long interval betwixt, was
the Jerusalem;[39] I mean not so much in distance of time, as in
excellency. After these three are entered, some lord-chamberlain should
be appointed, some critic of authority should be set before the door,
to keep out a crowd of little poets, who press for admission, and are
not of quality. Mævius would be deafening your lordship's ears with his

  _Fortunam Priami cantabo, et nobile bellum_--

mere fustian, as Horace would tell you from behind, without pressing
forward, and more smoke than fire. Pulci, Boiardo, and Ariosto,[40]
would cry out, "make room for the Italian poets, the descendants of
Virgil in a right line:" father Le Moine, with his saint Louis; and
Scudery with his Alaric, for a godly king and a Gothic conqueror;
and Chapelain would take it ill that his _Maid_ should be refused a
place with Helen and Lavinia.[41] Spencer[42] has a better plea for
his "Fairy Queen," had his action been finished, or had been one; and
Milton, if the devil had not been his hero, instead of Adam; if the
giant had not foiled the knight, and driven him out of his strong-hold,
to wander through the world with his lady errant; and if there had not
been more machining persons than human in his poem. After these, the
rest of our English poets shall not be mentioned. I have that honour
for them which I ought to have; but, if they are worthies, they are
not to be ranked amongst the three whom I have named, and who are
established in their reputation.

Before I quitted the comparison betwixt epic poetry and tragedy, I
should have acquainted my judge with one advantage of the former
over the latter, which I now casually remember out of the preface
of Ségrais before his translation of the Æneïs, or out of Bossu, no
matter which: "The style of the heroic poem is, and ought to be, more
lofty than that of the drama." The critic is certainly in the right,
for the reason already urged; the work of tragedy is on the passions,
and in a dialogue; both of them abhor strong metaphors, in which the
epopee delights. A poet cannot speak too plainly on the stage: for
_volat irrevocabile verbum_; the sense is lost, if it be not taken
flying. But what we read alone, we have leisure to digest; there an
author may beautify his sense by the boldness of his expression, which
if we understand not fully at the first, we may dwell upon it, till
we find the secret force and excellence. That which cures the manners
by alterative physic, as I said before, must proceed by insensible
degrees; but that which purges the passions, must do its business
all at once, or wholly fail of its effect, at least in the present
operation, and without repeated doses. We must beat the iron while it
is hot, but we may polish it at leisure. Thus, my lord, you pay the
fine of my forgetfulness; and yet the merits of both causes are where
they were, and undecided, till you declare whether it be more for the
benefit of mankind to have their manners in general corrected, or their
pride and hard-heartedness removed.

I must now come closer to my present business, and not think of making
more invasive wars abroad, when, like Hannibal, I am called back to
the defence of my own country. Virgil is attacked by many enemies; he
has a whole confederacy against him; and I must endeavour to defend
him as well as I am able. But their principal objections being against
his moral, the duration or length of time taken up in the action of
the poem, and what they have to urge against the manners of his hero;
I shall omit the rest as mere cavils of grammarians; at the worst,
but casual slips of a great man's pen, or inconsiderable faults of an
admirable poem, which the author had not leisure to review before his
death. Macrobius has answered what the ancients could urge against him;
and some things I have lately read in Tanneguy le Fèvre, Valois, and
another whom I name not, which are scarce worth answering. They begin
with the moral of his poem, which I have elsewhere confessed, and still
must own, not to be so noble as that of Homer.[43] But let both be
fairly stated; and, without contradicting my first opinion, I can shew,
that Virgil's was as useful to the Romans of his age, as Homer's was
to the Grecians of his, in what time soever he may be supposed to have
lived and flourished. Homer's moral was to urge the necessity of union,
and of a good understanding betwixt confederate states and princes
engaged in a war with a mighty monarch; as also of discipline in an
army, and obedience in the several chiefs to the supreme commander of
the joint forces. To inculcate this, he sets forth the ruinous effects
of discord in the camp of those allies, occasioned by the quarrel
betwixt the general and one of the next in office under him. Agamemnon
gives the provocation, and Achilles resents the injury. Both parties
are faulty in the quarrel; and accordingly they are both punished: the
aggressor is forced to sue for peace to his inferior on dishonourable
conditions: the deserter refuses the satisfaction offered; and his
obstinacy costs him his best friend. This works the natural effect of
choler, and turns his rage against him by whom he was last affronted,
and most sensibly. The greater anger expels the less; but his character
is still preserved. In the mean time, the Grecian army receives loss on
loss, and is half destroyed by a pestilence into the bargain:

  _Quidquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi_.

As the poet, in the first part of the example, had shewn the bad
effects of discord, so, after the reconcilement, he gives the good
effects of unity; for Hector is slain, and then Troy must fall. By
this it is probable, that Homer lived when the Median monarchy was
grown formidable to the Grecians, and that the joint endeavours of
his countrymen were little enough to preserve their common freedom
from an encroaching enemy. Such was his moral, which all critics have
allowed to be more noble than that of Virgil, though not adapted to
the times in which the Roman poet lived. Had Virgil flourished in the
age of Ennius, and addressed to Scipio, he had probably taken the
same moral, or some other not unlike it: for then the Romans were in
as much danger from the Carthaginian commonwealth, as the Grecians
were from the Assyrian or Median monarchy. But we are to consider
him as writing his poem in a time when the old form of government
was subverted, and a new one just established by Octavius Cæsar, in
effect by force of arms, but seemingly by the consent of the Roman
people. The commonwealth had received a deadly wound in the former
civil wars betwixt Marius and Sylla. The commons, while the first
prevailed, had almost shaken off the yoke of the nobility; and Marius
and Cinna, like the captains of the mob, under the specious pretence
of the public good, and of doing justice on the oppressors of their
liberty, revenged themselves, without form of law, on their private
enemies. Sylla, in his turn, proscribed the heads of the adverse party:
he too had nothing but liberty and reformation in his mouth; (for the
cause of religion is but a modern motive to rebellion, invented by
the Christian priesthood, refining on the heathen;[44]) Sylla, to be
sure, meant no more good to the Roman people than Marius before him,
whatever he declared; but sacrificed the lives, and took the estates,
of all his enemies, to gratify those who brought him into power. Such
was the reformation of the government by both parties. The senate and
the commons were the two bases on which it stood; and the two champions
of either faction, each, destroyed the foundations of the other side;
so the fabric, of consequence, must fall betwixt them, and tyranny must
be built upon their ruins. This comes of altering fundamental laws and
constitutions--like him, who, being in good health, lodged himself in
a physician's house, and was over-persuaded by his landlord to take
physic, (of which he died,) for the benefit of his doctor. _Stavo ben_:
(was written on his monument) _ma, per star meglio, sto quì_.

After the death of those two usurpers, the commonwealth seemed to
recover, and held up its head for a little time. But it was all the
while in a deep consumption, which is a flattering disease. Pompey,
Crassus, and Cæsar, had found the sweets of arbitrary power; and, each
being a check to the other's growth, struck up a false friendship
amongst themselves, and divided the government betwixt them, which none
of them was able to assume alone. These were the public-spirited men of
their age; that is, patriots for their own interest. The commonwealth
looked with a florid countenance in their management, spread in bulk,
and all the while was wasting in the vitals. Not to trouble your
lordship with the repetition of what you know--after the death of
Crassus, Pompey found himself outwitted by Cæsar, broke with him,
overpowered him in the senate, and caused many unjust decrees to pass
against him. Cæsar, thus injured, and unable to resist the faction of
the nobles which was now uppermost, (for he was a Marian,) had recourse
to arms; and his cause was just against Pompey, but not against his
country, whose constitution ought to have been sacred to him, and
never to have been violated on the account of any private wrong. But
he prevailed; and, heaven declaring for him, he became a providential
monarch, under the title of perpetual dictator. He being murdered by
his own son,[45] whom I neither dare commend, nor can justly blame,
(though Dante, in his _Inferno_, has put him and Cassius, and Judas
Iscariot betwixt them, into the great devil's mouth,) the commonwealth
popped up its head for the third time, under Brutus and Cassius, and
then sunk for ever.

Thus the Roman people were grossly gulled twice or thrice over, and
as often enslaved in one century, and under the same pretence of
reformation. At last the two battles of Philippi gave the decisive
stroke against liberty; and, not long after, the commonwealth was
turned into a monarchy, by the conduct and good fortune of Augustus.
It is true, that the despotic power could not have fallen into better
hands than those of the first and second Cæsar. Your lordship well
knows what obligations Virgil had to the latter of them: he saw,
beside, that the commonwealth was lost without resource; the heads of
it destroyed; the senate new moulded, grown degenerate, and either
bought off, or thrusting their own necks into the yoke, out of fear of
being forced. Yet I may safely affirm for our great author, (as men
of good sense are generally honest,) that he was still of republican
principles in his heart.

  _Secretosque pios, his dantem jura Catonem._[46]

I think, I need use no other argument to justify my opinion, than
that of this one line, taken from the eighth book of the Æneïs. If
he had not well studied his patron's temper, it might have ruined
him with another prince. But Augustus was not discontented, at least
that we can find, that Cato was placed, by his own poet, in Elysium,
and there giving laws to the holy souls who deserved to be separated
from the vulgar sort of good spirits; for his conscience could not
but whisper to the arbitrary monarch, that the kings of Rome were at
first elective, and governed not without a senate;--that Romulus was
no hereditary prince; and though, after his death, he received divine
honours for the good he did on earth, yet he was but a god of their
own making;--that the last Tarquin was expelled justly for overt acts
of tyranny, and mal-administration; for such are the conditions of
an elective kingdom: and I meddle not with others, being, for my own
opinion, of Montaigne's principles, that an honest man ought to be
contented with that form of government, and with those fundamental
constitutions of it, which he received from his ancestors, and under
which himself was born; though at the same time he confessed freely,
that, if he could have chosen his place of birth, it should have been
at Venice--which, for many reasons, I dislike, and am better pleased to
have been born an Englishman.

But, to return from my long rambling--I say, that Virgil having
maturely weighed the condition of the times in which he lived; that an
entire liberty was not to be retrieved; that the present settlement had
the prospect of a long continuance in the same family, or those adopted
into it; that he held his paternal estate from the bounty of the
conqueror, by whom he was likewise enriched, esteemed, and cherished;
that this conqueror, though of a bad kind, was the very best of it;
that the arts of peace flourished under him; that all men might be
happy, if they would be quiet; that, now he was in possession of the
whole, yet he shared a great part of his authority with the senate;
that he would be chosen into the ancient offices of the commonwealth,
and ruled by the power which he derived from them, and prorogued his
government from time to time, still, as it were, threatening to dismiss
himself from public cares, which he exercised more for the common good,
than for any delight he took in greatness;--these things, I say, being
considered by the poet, he concluded it to be the interest of his
country to be so governed; to infuse an awful respect into the people
towards such a prince; by that respect to confirm their obedience to
him, and by that obedience to make them happy. This was the moral of
his divine poem;[47]--honest in the poet; honourable to the emperor,
whom he derives from a divine extraction; and reflecting part of that
honour on the Roman people, whom he derives also from the Trojans; and
not only profitable, but necessary, to the present age, and likely to
be such to their posterity. That it was the received opinion, that the
Romans were descended from the Trojans, and Julius Cæsar from Iülus the
son of Æneas, was enough for Virgil; though perhaps he thought not so
himself, or that Æneas ever was in Italy; which Bochartus manifestly
proves. And Homer, where he says that Jupiter hated the house of Priam,
and was resolved to transfer the kingdom to the family of Æneas, yet
mentions nothing of his leading a colony into a foreign country, and
settling there. But that the Romans valued themselves on their Trojan
ancestry, is so undoubted a truth, that I need not prove it. Even
the seals which we have remaining of Julius Cæsar, which we know to
be antique, have the star of Venus over them, (though they were all
graven after his death,) as a note that he was deified. I doubt not but
one reason, why Augustus should be so passionately concerned for the
preservation of the Æneïs, which its author had condemned to be burnt,
as an imperfect poem, by his last will and testament, was, because it
did him a real service, as well as an honour; that a work should not be
lost, where his divine original was celebrated in verse, which had the
character of immortality stamped upon it.

Neither were the great Roman families, which flourished in his time,
less obliged by him than the emperor. Your lordship knows with what
address he makes mention of them, as captains of ships, or leaders in
the war; and even some of Italian extraction are not forgotten. These
are the single stars which are sprinkled through the Æneïs: but there
are whole constellations of them in the fifth book. And I could not but
take notice, when I translated it, of some favourite families to which
he gives the victory and awards the prizes, in the person of his hero,
at the funeral games which were celebrated in honour of Anchises. I
insist not on their names; but am pleased to find the Memmii amongst
them, derived from Mnestheus, because Lucretius dedicates to one of
that family, a branch of which destroyed Corinth. I likewise either
found or formed an image to myself of the contrary kind; that those,
who lost the prizes, were such as had disobliged the poet, or were
in disgrace with Augustus, or enemies to Mæcenas; and this was the
poetical revenge he took: for _genus irritabile vatum_, as Horace
says.[48] When a poet is thoroughly provoked, he will do himself
justice, however dear it cost him; _animamque in vulnere ponit_. I
think these are not bare imaginations of my own, though I find no
trace of them in the commentators; but one poet may judge of another
by himself. The vengeance we defer, is not forgotten. I hinted before,
that the whole Roman people were obliged by Virgil, in deriving them
from Troy; an ancestry which they affected. We and the French are of
the same humour: they would be thought to descend from a son, I think,
of Hector; and we would have our Britain both named and planted by a
descendant of Æneas. Spenser favours this opinion what he can. His
Prince Arthur, or whoever he intends by him, is a Trojan. Thus the hero
of Homer was a Grecian, of Virgil a Roman, of Tasso an Italian.

I have transgressed my bounds, and gone farther than the moral led me;
but, if your lordship is not tired, I am safe enough.

Thus far, I think, my author is defended. But, as Augustus is still
shadowed in the person of Æneas, (of which I shall say more, when I
come to the manners which the poet gives his hero,) I must prepare that
subject, by shewing how dexterously he managed both the prince and
people, so as to displease neither, and to do good to both; which is
the part of a wise and an honest man, and proves, that it is possible
for a courtier not to be a knave. I shall continue still to speak
my thoughts like a free-born subject, as I am; though such things,
perhaps, as no Dutch commentator could, and I am sure no Frenchman
durst. I have already told your lordship my opinion of Virgil, that
he was no arbitrary man. Obliged he was to his master for his bounty;
and he repays him with good counsel, how to behave himself in his new
monarchy, so as to gain the affections of his subjects, and deserve to
be called the father of his country. From this consideration it is,
that he chose, for the ground-work of his poem, one empire destroyed,
and another raised from the ruins of it. This was just the parallel.
Æneas could not pretend to be Priam's heir in a lineal succession;
for Anchises, the hero's father, was only of the second branch of the
royal family; and Helenus, a son of Priam, was yet surviving, and might
lawfully claim before him. It may be, Virgil mentions him on that
account. Neither has he forgotten Priamus, in the fifth of his Æneïs,
the son of Polites, youngest son to Priam, who was slain by Pyrrhus, in
the second book. Æneas had only married Creüsa, Priam's daughter, and
by her could have no title, while any of the male issue were remaining.
In this case, the poet gave him the next title, which is that of an
elective king. The remaining Trojans chose him to lead them forth,
and settle them in some foreign country. Ilioneus, in his speech to
Dido, calls him expressly by the name of king. Our poet, who all this
while had Augustus in his eye, had no desire he should seem to succeed
by any right of inheritance derived from Julius Cæsar, (such a title
being but one degree removed from conquest,) for what was introduced
by force, by force may be removed. It was better for the people that
they should give, than he should take; since that gift was indeed no
more at bottom, than a trust. Virgil gives us an example of this in the
person of Mezentius: he governed arbitrarily; he was expelled, and came
to the deserved end of all tyrants. Our author shows us another sort of
kingship, in the person of Latinus: he was descended from Saturn, and,
as I remember, in the third degree. He is described a just and gracious
prince, solicitous for the welfare of his people, always consulting
with his senate to promote the common good. We find him at the head of
them, when he enters into the council-hall, speaking first, but still
demanding their advice, and steering by it, as far as the iniquity
of the times would suffer him. And this is the proper character of
a king by inheritance, who is born a father of his country. Æneas,
though he married the heiress of the crown, yet claimed no title to
it during the life of his father-in-law. _Pater arma Latinus habeto_,
&c. are Virgil's words. As for himself, he was contented to take care
of his country gods, who were not those of Latium; wherein our divine
author seems to relate to the after-practice of the Romans, which was
to adopt the gods of those they conquered, or received as members of
their commonwealth. Yet, withal, he plainly touches at the office of
the high-priesthood, with which Augustus was invested, and which made
his person more sacred and inviolable, than even the tribunitial power.
It was not therefore for nothing, that the most judicious of all poets
made that office vacant by the death of Panthûs in the second book of
the Æneïs, for his hero to succeed in it, and consequently for Augustus
to enjoy. I know not that any of the commentators have taken notice of
that passage. If they have not, I am sure they ought; and if they have,
I am not indebted to them for the observation. The words of Virgil are
very plain--

  _Sacra, suosque tibi commendat Troja penates._

As for Augustus, or his uncle Julius, claiming by descent from Æneas,
that title is already out of doors. Æneas succeeded not, but was
elected. Troy was fore-doomed to fall for ever.

  _Postquam res Asiæ Priamique evertere gentem
  Immeritam visum superis._--Æneïs, Lib. III. v. 1.

Augustus, it is true, had once resolved to rebuild that city, and there
to make the seat of empire: but Horace writes an ode on purpose to
deter him from that thought; declaring the place to be accursed, and
that the gods would as often destroy it, as it should be raised.[49]
Hereupon the emperor laid aside a project so ungrateful to the Roman
people. But by this, my lord, we may conclude, that he had still his
pedigree in his head, and had an itch of being thought a divine king,
if his poets had not given him better counsel.

I will pass by many less material objections, for want of room to
answer them: what follows next is of great importance, if the critics
can make out their charge; for it is levelled at the manners which our
poet gives his hero, and which are the same which were eminently seen
in his Augustus. Those manners were, piety to the gods and a dutiful
affection to his father, love to his relations, care of his people,
courage and conduct in the wars, gratitude to those who had obliged
him, and justice in general to mankind.

Piety, as your lordship sees, takes place of all, as the chief part of
his character; and the word in Latin is more full than it can possibly
be expressed in any modern language; for there it comprehends not
only devotion to the gods, but filial love, and tender affection to
relations of all sorts. As instances of this, the deities of Troy, and
his own Penates, are made the companions of his flight: they appear
to him in his voyage, and advise him; and at last he replaces them
in Italy, their native country. For his father, he takes him on his
back: he leads his little son: his wife follows him; but, losing his
footsteps through fear or ignorance, he goes back into the midst of
his enemies to find her, and leaves not his pursuit until her ghost
appears, to forbid his farther search. I will say nothing of his duty
to his father while he lived, his sorrow for his death, of the games
instituted in honour of his memory, or seeking him, by his command,
even after his death, in the Elysian fields. I will not mention his
tenderness for his son, which everywhere is visible--of his raising a
tomb for Polydorus, the obsequies for Misenus, his pious remembrance
of Deïphobus, the funerals of his nurse, his grief for Pallas, and
his revenge taken on his murderer, whom otherwise, by his natural
compassion, he had forgiven: and then the poem had been left imperfect;
for we could have had no certain prospect of his happiness, while the
last obstacle to it was unremoved. Of the other parts which compose
his character, as a king, or as a general, I need say nothing; the
whole Æneïs is one continued instance of some one or other of them; and
where I find any thing of them taxed, it shall suffice me, as briefly
as I can, to vindicate my divine master to your lordship, and by you
to the reader. But herein Ségrais, in his admirable preface to his
translation of the Æneïs, as the author of the Dauphin's Virgil justly
calls it, has prevented me. Him I follow, and what I borrow from him,
am ready to acknowledge to him. For, impartially speaking, the French
are as much better critics than the English, as they are worse poets.
Thus we generally allow, that they better understand the management
of a war than our islanders; but we know we are superior to them in
the day of battle. They value themselves on their generals, we on our
soldiers. But this is not the proper place to decide that question, if
they make it one. I shall perhaps say as much of other nations, and
their poets, excepting only Tasso; and hope to make my assertion good,
which is but doing justice to my country; part of which honour will
reflect on your lordship, whose thoughts are always just; your numbers
harmonious, your words chosen, your expressions strong and manly, your
verse flowing, and your turns as happy as they are easy. If you would
set us more copies, your example would make all precepts needless.
In the mean time, that little you have written is owned, and that
particularly by the poets, (who are a nation not over lavish of praise
to their contemporaries,) as a principal ornament of our language; but
the sweetest essences are always confined in the smallest glasses.

When I speak of your lordship, it is never a digression, and therefore
I need beg no pardon for it; but take up Ségrais where I left him, and
shall use him less often than I have occasion for him; for his preface
is a perfect piece of criticism, full and clear, and digested into an
exact method; mine is loose, and, as I intended it, epistolary. Yet I
dwell on many things, which he durst not touch; for it is dangerous
to offend an arbitrary master; and every patron, who has the power
of Augustus, has not his clemency. In short, my lord, I would not
translate him, because I would bring you somewhat of my own. His notes
and observations on every book are of the same excellency; and, for the
same reason, I omit the greater part.

He takes notice that Virgil is arraigned for placing piety before
valour, and making that piety the chief character of his hero. I have
said already from Bossu, that a poet is not obliged to make his hero a
virtuous man; therefore, neither Homer nor Tasso are to be blamed, for
giving what predominant quality they pleased to their first character.
But Virgil, who designed to form a perfect prince, and would insinuate
that Augustus, whom he calls Æneas in his poem, was truly such, found
himself obliged to make him without blemish, thoroughly virtuous; and a
thorough virtue both begins and ends in piety. Tasso, without question,
observed this before me, and therefore split his hero in two: he gave
Godfrey piety, and Rinaldo fortitude, for their chief qualities or
manners. Homer, who had chosen another moral, makes both Agamemnon and
Achilles vicious; for his design was to instruct in virtue, by shewing
the deformity of vice. I avoid repetition of what I have said above.
What follows, is translated literally from Ségrais.

"Virgil had considered, that the greatest virtues of Augustus consisted
in the perfect art of governing his people; which caused him to reign
for more than forty years in great felicity. He considered, that his
emperor was valiant, civil, popular, eloquent, politic, and religious;
he has given all these qualities to Æneas. But, knowing that piety
alone comprehends the whole duty of man towards the gods, towards his
country, and towards his relations, he judged, that this ought to be
his first character, whom he would set for a pattern of perfection. In
reality, they who believe, that the praises which arise from valour
are superior to those which proceed from any other virtues, have not
considered, (as they ought,) that valour, destitute of other virtues,
cannot render a man worthy of any true esteem. That quality, which
signifies no more than an intrepid courage, may be separated from many
others which are good, and accompanied with many which are ill. A man
may be very valiant, and yet impious and vicious. But the same cannot
be said of piety, which excludes all ill qualities, and comprehends
even valour itself, with all other qualities which are good. Can we,
for example, give the praise of valour to a man, who should see his
gods prophaned, and should want the courage to defend them? to a
man, who should abandon his father, or desert his king, in his last
necessity?"

Thus far Ségrais, in giving the preference to piety before valour.
I will now follow him, where he considers this valour, or intrepid
courage, singly in itself; and this also Virgil gives to his Æneas, and
that in a heroical degree.

Having first concluded, that our poet did for the best in taking the
first character of his hero from that essential virtue on which the
rest depend, he proceeds to tell us, that, in the ten years' war
of Troy, he was considered as the second champion of his country,
(allowing Hector the first place;) and this, even by the confession
of Homer, who took all occasions of setting up his own countrymen the
Grecians, and of undervaluing the Trojan chiefs. But Virgil (whom
Ségrais forgot to cite) makes Diomede give him a higher character for
strength and courage. His testimony is this, in the Eleventh Book:

    ----------------_Stetimus tela aspera contra,
  Contulimusque manus: experto credite, quantus
  In clypeum assurgat, quo turbine torqueat hastam.
  Si duo præterea tales Idæa tulisset
  Terra viros, ultro Inachias venisset ad urbes
  Dardanus, et versis lugeret Græcia fatis.
  Quidquid apud duræ cessatum est mœnia Trojæ,
  Hectoris Æneæque manu victoria Graiûm
  Hæsit, et in decumum vestigia retulit annum.
  Ambo animis, ambo insignes præstantibus armis:
  Hic pietate prior._------

I give not here my translation of these verses, (though I think I have
not ill succeeded in them,) because your lordship is so great a master
of the original, that I have no reason to desire you should see Virgil
and me so near together; but you may please, my lord, to take notice,
that the Latin author refines upon the Greek, and insinuates, that
Homer had done his hero wrong, in giving the advantage of the duel to
his own countryman; though Diomede was manifestly the second champion
of the Grecians; and Ulysses preferred him before Ajax, when he chose
him for the companion of his nightly expedition; for he had a headpiece
of his own, and wanted only the fortitude of another, to bring him off
with safety, and that he might compass his design with honour.

The French translator thus proceeds: "They, who accuse Æneas for want
of courage, either understand not Virgil, or have read him slightly;
otherwise they would not raise an objection so easy to be answered."
Hereupon he gives so many instances of the hero's valour, that to
repeat them after him would tire your lordship, and put me to the
unnecessary trouble of transcribing the greatest part of the three last
Æneids. In short, more could not be expected from an Amadis, a Sir
Lancelot, or the whole Round Table, than he performs. _Proxima quæque
metit gladio_, is the perfect account of a knight-errant. "If it be
replied," continues Ségrais, "that it was not difficult for him to
undertake and achieve such hardy enterprises, because he wore enchanted
arms; that accusation, in the first place, must fall on Homer, ere it
can reach Virgil." Achilles was as well provided with them as Æneas,
though he was invulnerable without them.[50] And Ariosto, the two
Tassos, (Bernardo and Torquato,) even our own Spenser--in a word, all
modern poets--have copied Homer as well as Virgil: he is neither the
first nor last, but in the midst of them; and therefore is safe, if
they are so. "Who knows," says Ségrais, "but that his fated armour was
only an allegorical defence, and signified no more than that he was
under the peculiar protection of the gods? born, as the astrologers
will tell us out of Virgil, (who was well versed in the Chaldean
mysteries,) under the favourable influence of Jupiter, Venus, and the
Sun." But I insist not on this, because I know you believe not there is
such an art; though not only Horace and Persius, but Augustus himself,
thought otherwise. But, in defence of Virgil, I dare positively say,
that he has been more cautious in this particular than either his
predecessor, or his descendants: for Æneas was actually wounded, in the
Twelfth of the Æneis; though he had the same godsmith[51] to forge his
arms as had Achilles. It seems he was no _warluck_,[52] as the Scots
commonly call such men, who, they say, are iron-free, or lead-free.
Yet, after this experiment, that his arms were not impenetrable--when
he was cured indeed by his mother's help, because he was that day to
conclude the war by the death of Turnus--the poet durst not carry the
miracle too far, and restore him wholly to his former vigour: he was
still too weak to overtake his enemy; yet we see with what courage
he attacks Turnus, when he faces and renews the combat. I need say
no more; for Virgil defends himself without needing my assistance,
and proves his hero truly to deserve that name. He was not then a
second-rate champion, as they would have him, who think fortitude the
first virtue in a hero. But, being beaten from this hold, they will not
yet allow him to be valiant, because he wept more often, as they think,
than well becomes a man of courage.

In the first place, if tears are arguments of cowardice, what shall I
say of Homer's hero? Shall Achilles pass for timorous, because he wept,
and wept on less occasions than Æneas? Herein Virgil must be granted to
have excelled his master. For once both heroes are described lamenting
their lost loves: Briseïs was taken away by force from the Grecians;
Creüsa was lost for ever to her husband. But Achilles went roaring
along the salt sea-shore, and, like a booby, was complaining to his
mother, when he should have revenged his injury by arms. Æneas took a
nobler course; for, having secured his father and his son, he repeated
all his former dangers, to have found his wife, if she had been above
ground. And here your lordship may observe the address of Virgil;
it was not for nothing that this passage was related with all these
tender circumstances. Æneas told it; Dido heard it. That he had been so
affectionate a husband, was no ill argument to the coming dowager, that
he might prove as kind to her. Virgil has a thousand secret beauties,
though I have not leisure to remark them.

Ségrais, on this subject of a hero shedding tears, observes, that
historians commend Alexander for weeping when he read the mighty
actions of Achilles; and Julius Cæsar is likewise praised, when, out
of the same noble envy, he wept at the victories of Alexander. But,
if we observe more closely, we shall find, that the tears of Æneas
were always on a laudable occasion. Thus he weeps out of compassion
and tenderness of nature, when, in the temple of Carthage, he beholds
the pictures of his friends, who sacrificed their lives in defence of
their country. He deplores the lamentable end of his pilot Palinurus,
the untimely death of young Pallas his confederate, and the rest, which
I omit. Yet, even for these tears, his wretched critics dare condemn
him. They make Æneas little better than a kind of St Swithin[53] hero,
always raining. One of these censors is bold enough to argue him of
cowardice, when, in the beginning of the first book, he not only weeps,
but trembles, at an approaching storm--

  _Extemplo Æneæ solvuntur frigore membra:
  Ingemit; et duplices tendens ad sidera palmas_, &c.

But to this I have answered formerly, that his fear was not for
himself, but for his people. And what can give a sovereign a better
commendation, or recommend a hero more to the affection of the
reader? They were threatened with a tempest, and he wept; he was
promised Italy, and therefore he prayed for the accomplishment of
that promise:--all this in the beginning of a storm; therefore he
shewed the more early piety, and the quicker sense of compassion. Thus
much I have urged elsewhere in the defence of Virgil; and, since,
I have been informed by Mr Moyle,[54] a young gentleman whom I can
never sufficiently commend, that the ancients accounted drowning an
accursed death; so that, if we grant him to have been afraid, he had
just occasion for that fear, both in relation to himself and to his
subjects. I think our adversaries can carry this argument no farther,
unless they tell us, that he ought to have had more confidence in the
promise of the gods; but how was he assured, that he had understood
their oracles aright? Helenus might be mistaken; Phœbus might speak
doubtfully; even his mother might flatter him, that he might prosecute
his voyage, which if it succeeded happily, he should be the founder
of an empire; for, that she herself was doubtful of his fortune, is
apparent by the address she made to Jupiter on his behalf; to which the
god makes answer in these words:

  _Parce metû, Cytherea: manent immota tuorum
  Fata tibi_, &c.

notwithstanding which, the goddess, though comforted, was not assured;
for, even after this, through the course of the whole Æneïs, she still
apprehends the interest which Juno might make with Jupiter against her
son. For it was a moot point in heaven, whether he could alter fate, or
not. And indeed some passages in Virgil would make us suspect, that he
was of opinion Jupiter might defer fate, though he could not alter it;
for, in the latter end of the tenth book, he introduces Juno begging
for the life of Turnus, and flattering her husband with the power
of changing destiny--_Tua, qui potes, orsa reflectas!_ To which he
graciously answers:

  _Si mora præsentis leti, tempusque caduco
  Oratur juveni, meque hoc ita ponere sentis,
  Tolle fugâ Turnum, atque instantibus eripe fatis.
  Hactenus indulsisse vacat. Sin altior istis
  Sub precibus venia ulla latet, totumque moveri
  Mutarive putas bellum, spes pascis inanes._

But, that he could not alter those decrees, the king of gods himself
confesses, in the book above cited, when he comforts Hercules for the
death of Pallas, who had invoked his aid, before he threw his lance at
Turnus--

  ------_Trojæ sub mænibus altis,
  Tot nati cecidere deûm; quin occidit unâ
  Sarpedon, mea progenies. Etiam sua Turnum
  Fata manent, metasque dati pervenit ad ævi_--

where he plainly acknowledges, that he could not save his own son, or
prevent the death which he foresaw. Of his power to defer the blow,
I once occasionally discoursed with that excellent person Sir Robert
Howard,[55] who is better conversant, than any man that I know, in
the doctrine of the Stoics; and he set me right, from the concurrent
testimony of philosophers and poets, that Jupiter could not retard
the effects of fate, even for a moment. For, when I cited Virgil, as
favouring the contrary opinion in that verse,

  _Tolle fugâ Turnum, atque instantibus eripe fatis_----

he replied, and, I think, with exact judgment, that, when Jupiter gave
Juno leave to withdraw Turnus from the present danger, it was because
he certainly foreknew that his fatal hour was not come; that it was
in destiny for Juno at that time to save him; and that himself obeyed
destiny, in giving her that leave.

I need say no more in justification of our hero's courage, and am
much deceived, if he ever be attacked on this side of his character
again. But he is arraigned with more shew of reason by the ladies, who
will make a numerous party against him, for being false to love, in
forsaking Dido. And I cannot much blame them; for, to say the truth,
it is an ill precedent for their gallants to follow. Yet, if I can
bring him off with flying colours, they may learn experience at her
cost, and, for her sake, avoid a cave, as the worst shelter they can
chuse from a shower of rain, especially when they have a lover in their
company.

In the first place, Ségrais observes with much acuteness, that they
who blame Æneas for his insensibility of love when he left Carthage,
contradict their former accusation of him, for being always crying,
compassionate, and effeminately sensible of those misfortunes which
befel others. They give him two contrary characters; but Virgil makes
him of a piece, always grateful, always tender-hearted. But they are
impudent enough to discharge themselves of this blunder, by laying
the contradiction at Virgil's door. He, say they, has shewn his hero
with these inconsistent characters, acknowledging and ungrateful,
compassionate and hard-hearted, but, at the bottom, fickle and
self-interested; for Dido had not only received his weather-beaten
troops before she saw him, and given them her protection, but had also
offered them an equal share in her dominion--

  _Vultis et his mecum pariter considere regnis?
  Urbem quam statuo, vestra est._

This was an obligement never to be forgotten; and the more to be
considered, because antecedent to her love. That passion, it is true,
produced the usual effects, of generosity, gallantry, and care to
please; and thither we refer them. But, when she had made all these
advances, it was still in his power to have refused them; after the
intrigue of the cave, (call it marriage, or enjoyment only,) he was
no longer free to take or leave; he had accepted the favour, and was
obliged to be constant, if he would be grateful.

My lord, I have set this argument in the best light I can, that the
ladies may not think I write booty; and perhaps it may happen to me, as
it did to Doctor Cudworth,[56] who has raised such strong objections
against the being of a God, and Providence, that many think he has
not answered them. You may please at least to hear the adverse party.
Ségrais pleads for Virgil, that no less than an absolute command from
Jupiter could excuse this insensibility of the hero, and this abrupt
departure, which looks so like extreme ingratitude. But, at the same
time, he does wisely to remember you, that Virgil had made piety the
first character of Æneas; and, this being allowed, (as I am afraid
it must,) he was obliged, antecedent to all other considerations, to
search an asylum for his gods in Italy--for those very gods, I say,
who had promised to his race the universal empire. Could a pious man
dispense with the commands of Jupiter, to satisfy his passion, or
(take it in the strongest sense) to comply with the obligations of
his gratitude? Religion, it is true, must have moral honesty for its
ground-work, or we shall be apt to suspect its truth; but an immediate
revelation dispenses with all duties of morality. All casuists agree,
that theft is a breach of the moral law; yet, if I might presume to
mingle things sacred with prophane, the Israelites only spoiled the
Egyptians, not robbed them, because the propriety was transferred by a
revelation to their law-giver. I confess, Dido was a very infidel in
this point; for she would not believe, as Virgil makes her say, that
ever Jupiter would send Mercury on such an immoral errand. But this
needs no answer, at least no more than Virgil gives it--

  _Fata obstant; placidasque viri Deus obstruit aures._

This notwithstanding, as Ségrais confesses, he might have shewn a
little more sensibility when he left her; for that had been according
to his character.

But let Virgil answer for himself. He still loved her, and struggled
with his inclinations, to obey the gods:

  ----_Curam sub corde premebat,
  Multa gemens, magnoque animum labefactus amore._

Upon the whole matter, and humanly speaking, I doubt there was a fault
somewhere: and Jupiter is better able to bear the blame, than either
Virgil or Æneas. The poet, it seems, had found it out, and therefore
brings the deserting hero and the forsaken lady to meet together in
the lower regions, where he excuses himself when it is too late;
and accordingly she will take no satisfaction, nor so much as hear
him. Now Ségrais is forced to abandon his defence, and excuses his
author, by saying, that the Æneïs is an imperfect work, and that death
prevented the divine poet from reviewing it; and for that reason he
had condemned it to the fire;[57] though, at the same time, his two
translators must acknowledge, that the Sixth Book is the most correct
of the whole Æneïs. Oh! how convenient is a machine sometimes in a
heroic poem! This of Mercury is plainly one; and Virgil was constrained
to use it here, or the honesty of his hero would be ill-defended. And
the fair sex, however, if they had the deserter in their power, would
certainly have shewn him no more mercy than the Bacchanals did Orpheus:
for, if too much constancy may be a fault sometimes, then want of
constancy, and ingratitude after the last favour, is a crime that never
will be forgiven. But, of machines, more in their proper place; where
I shall shew, with how much judgment they have been used by Virgil;
and, in the mean time, pass to another article of his defence, on the
present subject; where, if I cannot clear the hero, I hope at least
to bring off the poet; for here I must divide their causes. Let Æneas
trust to his machine, which will only help to break his fall; but the
address is incomparable. Plato, who borrowed so much from Homer, and
yet concluded for the banishment of all poets, would at least have
rewarded Virgil, before he sent him into exile. But I go farther, and
say, that he ought to be acquitted, and deserved, beside, the bounty
of Augustus, and the gratitude of the Roman people. If, after this,
the ladies will stand out, let them remember, that the jury is not all
agreed; for Octavia was of his party, and was of the first quality in
Rome; she was also present at the reading of the Sixth Æneïd: and we
know not that she condemned Æneas; but we are sure she presented the
poet, for his admirable elegy on her son Marcellus.

But let us consider the secret reasons which Virgil had, for thus
framing this noble episode, wherein the whole passion of love is more
exactly described than in any other poet. Love was the theme of his
Fourth Book; and, though it is the shortest of the whole Æneïs, yet
there he has given its beginning, its progress, its traverses, and its
conclusion; and had exhausted so entirely this subject, that he could
resume it but very slightly in the eight ensuing books.

She was warmed with the graceful appearance of the hero; she smothered
those sparkles out of decency; but conversation blew them up into a
flame. Then she was forced to make a confident of her whom she best
might trust, her own sister, who approves the passion, and thereby
augments it; then succeeds her public owning it; and, after that, the
consummation. Of Venus and Juno, Jupiter and Mercury, I say nothing;
for they were all machining work; but, possession having cooled his
love, as it increased hers, she soon perceived the change, or at least
grew suspicious of a change; this suspicion soon turned to jealousy,
and jealousy to rage; then she disdains and threatens, and again is
humble, and entreats, and, nothing availing, despairs, curses, and at
last becomes her own executioner. See here the whole process of that
passion, to which nothing can be added. I dare go no farther, lest I
should lose the connection of my discourse.[58]

To love our native country, and to study its benefit and its glory, to
be interested in its concerns, is natural to all men, and is indeed
our common duty. A poet makes a farther step; for, endeavouring to do
honour to it, it is allowable in him even to be partial in its cause;
for he is not tied to truth, or fettered by the laws of history. Homer
and Tasso are justly praised for chusing their heroes out of Greece
and Italy; Virgil indeed made his a Trojan; but it was to derive the
Romans and his own Augustus from him. But all the three poets are
manifestly partial to their heroes, in favour of their country; for
Dares Phrygius reports of Hector, that he was slain cowardly: Æneas,
according to the best account, slew not Mezentius, but was slain by
him; and the chronicles of Italy tell us little of that Rinaldo d'Este,
who conquers Jerusalem in Tasso. He might be a champion of the church;
but we know not that he was so much as present at the siege. To apply
this to Virgil, he thought himself engaged in honour to espouse the
cause and quarrel of his country against Carthage. He knew he could not
please the Romans better, or oblige them more to patronize his poem,
than by disgracing the foundress of that city. He shews her ungrateful
to the memory of her first husband, doting on a stranger; enjoyed, and
afterwards forsaken, by him. This was the original, says he, of the
immortal hatred betwixt the two rival nations. It is true, he colours
the falsehood of Æneas by an express command from Jupiter, to forsake
the queen, who had obliged him; but he knew the Romans were to be his
readers; and them he bribed, perhaps at the expence of his hero's
honesty; but he gained his cause, however, as pleading before corrupt
judges. They were content to see their founder false to love; for
still he had the advantage of the amour; it was their enemy whom he
forsook; and she might have forsaken him, if he had not got the start
of her; she had already forgotten her vows to her Sichæus; and _varium
et mutabile semper femina_, is the sharpest satire, in the fewest
words, that ever was made on woman-kind; for both the adjectives are
neuter, and _animal_ must be understood, to make them grammar. Virgil
does well to put those words into the mouth of Mercury. If a god had
not spoken them, neither durst he have written them, nor I translated
them. Yet the deity was forced to come twice on the same errand; and
the second time, as much a hero as Æneas was, he frighted him. It seems
he feared not Jupiter so much as Dido; for your lordship may observe,
that, as much intent as he was upon his voyage, yet he still delayed
it, till the messenger was obliged to tell him plainly, that, if he
weighed not anchor in the night, the queen would be with him in the
morning--_notumque, furens quid femina possit_--she was injured; she
was revengeful; she was powerful. The poet had likewise before hinted,
that the people were naturally perfidious; for he gives their character
in the queen, and makes a proverb of _Punica fides_, many ages before
it was invented.

Thus, I hope, my lord, that I have made good my promise, and justified
the poet, whatever becomes of the false knight. And sure a poet is as
much privileged to lie as an ambassador, for the honour and interest of
his country; at least as Sir Henry Wotton has defined.[59]

This naturally leads me to the defence of the famous anachronism, in
making Æneas and Dido contemporaries; for it is certain, that the hero
lived almost two hundred years before the building of Carthage. One
who imitates Boccalini, says, that Virgil was accused before Apollo
for this error. The god soon found, that he was not able to defend
his favourite by reason; for the case was clear: he therefore gave
this middle sentence, that any thing might be allowed to his son
Virgil, on the account of his other merits; that, being a monarch,
he had a dispensing power, and pardoned him. But, that this special
act of grace might never be drawn into example, or pleaded by his
puny successors in justification of their ignorance, he decreed for
the future, no poet should presume to make a lady die for love two
hundred years before her birth. To moralize this story, Virgil is the
Apollo who has this dispensing power. His great judgment made the laws
of poetry; but he never made himself a slave to them; chronology, at
best, is but a cobweb-law, and he broke through it with his weight.
They who will imitate him wisely, must chuse, as he did, an obscure
and a remote æra, where they may invent at pleasure, and not be easily
contradicted. Neither he, nor the Romans, had ever read the Bible, by
which only his false computation of times can be made out against him.
This Ségrais says in his defence, and proves it from his learned friend
Bochartus, whose letter on this subject he has printed at the end of
the fourth Æneïd, to which I refer your lordship and the reader. Yet
the credit of Virgil was so great, that he made this fable of his own
invention pass for an authentic history, or at least as credible as
any thing in Homer. Ovid takes it up after him, even in the same age,
and makes an ancient heroine of Virgil's new-created Dido; dictates
a letter for her, just before her death, to the ungrateful fugitive;
and, very unluckily for himself, is for measuring a sword with a man so
much superior in force to him, on the same subject. I think I may be
judge of this, because I have translated both.[60] The famous author
of the "Art of Love" has nothing of his own; he borrows all from a
greater master in his own profession; and, which is worse, improves
nothing which he finds. Nature fails him; and, being forced to his old
shift, he has recourse to witticism. This passes indeed with his soft
admirers, and gives him the preference to Virgil in their esteem. But
let them like for themselves, and not prescribe to others; for our
author needs not their admiration.

The motives that induced Virgil to coin this fable, I have shewed
already; and have also begun to shew, that he might make this
anachronism, by superseding the mechanic rules of poetry, for the same
reason that a monarch may dispense with or suspend his own laws, when
he finds it necessary so to do, especially if those laws are not
altogether fundamental. Nothing is to be called a fault in poetry,
says Aristotle, but what is against the art; therefore a man may be
an admirable poet, without being an exact chronologer. Shall we dare,
continues Ségrais, to condemn Virgil for having made a fiction against
the order of time, when we commend Ovid and other poets, who have made
many of their fictions against the order of nature? For what else are
the splendid miracles of the Metamorphoses? Yet these are beautiful
as they are related, and have also deep learning and instructive
mythologies couched under them: but to give, as Virgil does in this
episode, the original cause of the long wars betwixt Rome and Carthage,
to draw truth out of fiction after so probable a manner, with so much
beauty, and so much for the honour of his country, was proper only to
the divine wit of Maro; and Tasso, in one of his discourses, admires
him for this particularly. It is not lawful, indeed, to contradict a
point of history which is known to all the world, as, for example, to
make Hannibal and Scipio contemporaries with Alexander; but, in the
dark recesses of antiquity, a great poet may and ought to feign such
things as he finds not there, if they can be brought to embellish that
subject which he treats. On the other side, the pains and diligence of
ill poets is but thrown away, when they want the genius to invent and
feign agreeably. But, if the fictions be delightful, (which they always
are, if they be natural,) if they be of a piece; if the beginning, the
middle, and the end, be in their due places, and artfully united to
each other, such works can never fail of their deserved success. And
such is Virgil's episode of Dido and Æneas; where the sourest critic
must acknowledge, that, if he had deprived his Æneïs of so great an
ornament because he found no traces of it in antiquity, he had avoided
their unjust censure, but had wanted one of the greatest beauties of
his poem. I shall say more of this in the next article of their charge
against him, which is want of invention. In the mean time, I may
affirm, in honour of this episode, that it is not only now esteemed the
most pleasing entertainment of the Æneïs, but was so accounted in his
own age, and before it was mellowed into that reputation which time has
given it; for which I need produce no other testimony, than that of
Ovid, his contemporary--

  _Nec pars ulla magis legitur de corpore toto,
    Quam non legitimo fœdere junctus amor_--

where, by the way, you may observe, my lord, that Ovid, in those words,
_Non legitimo fœdere junctus amor_, will by no means allow it to be
a lawful marriage betwixt Dido and Æneas. He was in banishment when he
wrote those verses, which I cite from his letter to Augustus: "You,
Sir," saith he, "have sent me into exile for writing my 'Art of Love,'
and my wanton Elegies; yet your own poet was happy in your good graces,
though he brought Dido and Æneas into a cave, and left them there not
over-honestly together. May I be so bold to ask your majesty, is it a
greater fault to teach the art of unlawful love, than to shew it in
the action?" But was Ovid, the court-poet, so bad a courtier, as to
find no other plea to excuse himself, than by a plain accusation of his
master? Virgil confessed it was a lawful marriage betwixt the lovers,
that Juno the goddess of matrimony had ratified it by her presence;
for it was her business to bring matters to that issue. That the
ceremonies were short, we may believe; for Dido was not only amorous,
but a widow. Mercury himself, though employed on a quite contrary
errand, yet owns it a marriage by an inuendo--_pulchramque uxorius
urbem exstruis_. He calls Æneas not only a husband, but upbraids him
for being a fond husband, as the word _uxorius_ implies. Now mark a
little, if your lordship pleases, why Virgil is so much concerned to
make this marriage (for he seems to be the father of the bride himself,
and to give her to the bridegroom); It was to make way for the divorce
which he intended afterwards; for he was a finer flatterer than Ovid;
and I more than conjecture, that he had in his eye the divorce which
not long before had passed betwixt the emperor and Scribonia.[61] He
drew this dimple in the cheek of Æneas, to prove Augustus of the same
family, by so remarkable a feature in the same place. Thus, as we say
in our home-spun English proverb, he killed two birds with one stone;
pleased the emperor, by giving him the resemblance of his ancestor, and
gave him such a resemblance as was not scandalous in that age. For,
to leave one wife, and take another, was but a matter of gallantry at
that time of day among the Romans. _Neque hæc in fœdera veni_, is
the very excuse which Æneas makes, when he leaves his lady: "I made no
such bargain with you at our marriage, to live always drudging on at
Carthage: my business was Italy; and I never made a secret of it. If I
took my pleasure, had not you your share of it? I leave you free, at
my departure, to comfort yourself with the next stranger who happens
to be shipwrecked on your coast. Be as kind a hostess as you have been
to me; and you can never fail of another husband. In the mean time, I
call the gods to witness, that I leave your shore unwillingly; for,
though Juno made the marriage, yet Jupiter commands me to forsake you."
This is the effect of what he saith, when it is dishonoured out of
Latin verse, into English prose. If the poet argued not aright, we must
pardon him for a poor blind heathen, who knew no better morals.

I have detained your lordship longer than I intended, on this
objection, which would indeed weigh something in a spiritual court;
but I am not to defend our poet there. The next, I think, is but a
cavil, though the cry is great against him, and hath continued from
the time of Macrobius to this present age. I hinted it before. They
lay no less than want of invention to his charge--a capital crime, I
must acknowledge; for a poet is a maker,[62] as the word signifies; and
he, who cannot make, that is, invent, hath his name for nothing. That
which makes this accusation look so strange[63] at the first sight, is,
that he has borrowed so many things from Homer, Apollonius Rhodius, and
others who preceded him. But, in the first place, if invention is to be
taken in so strict a sense, that the matter of a poem must be wholly
new, and that in all its parts, then Scaliger hath made out, saith
Ségrais, that the history of Troy was no more the invention of Homer,
than of Virgil. There was not an old woman, or almost a child, but had
it in their mouths, before the Greek poet or his friends digested it
into this admirable order in which we read it. At this rate, as Solomon
hath told us, there is nothing new beneath the sun. Who then can pass
for an inventor, if Homer, as well as Virgil, must be deprived of that
glory? Is Versailles the less a new building, because the architect
of that palace hath imitated others which were built before it?
Walls, doors, and windows, apartments, offices, rooms of convenience
and magnificence, are in all great houses. So descriptions, figures,
fables, and the rest, must be in all heroic poems; they are the common
materials of poetry, furnished from the magazine of nature; every poet
hath as much right to them, as every man hath to air or water.

  _Quid prohibetis aquas? Usus communis aquarum est._

But the argument of the work, that is to say, its principal action,
the œconomy and disposition of it; these are the things which
distinguish copies from originals. The poet, who borrows nothing from
others, is yet to be born; he and the Jews' Messias will come together.
There are parts of the Æneïs, which resemble some parts both of the
Ilias and of the Odysses; as, for example, Æneas descended into hell,
and Ulysses had been there before him; Æneas loved Dido, and Ulysses
loved Calypso; in few words, Virgil hath imitated Homer's Odysses in
his first six books, and, in his six last, the Ilias. But from hence
can we infer, that the two poets write the same history? Is there no
invention in some other parts of Virgil's Æneïs? The disposition of so
many various matters, is not that his own? From what book of Homer
had Virgil his episode of Nisus and Euryalus, of Mezentius and Lausus?
From whence did he borrow his design of bringing Æneas into Italy? of
establishing the Roman empire on the foundations of a Trojan colony? to
say nothing of the honour he did his patron, not only in his descent
from Venus, but in making him so like her in his best features, that
the goddess might have mistaken Augustus for her son. He had indeed the
story from common fame, as Homer had his from the Egyptian priestess.
_Æneadûm genetrix_ was no more unknown to Lucretius, than to him. But
Lucretius taught him not to form his hero, to give him piety or valour
for his manners, and both in so eminent a degree, that, having done
what was possible for man to save his king and country, his mother was
forced to appear to him, and restrain his fury, which hurried him to
death in their revenge. But the poet made his piety more successful;
he brought off his father and his son; and his gods witnessed to his
devotion, by putting themselves under his protection, to be replaced
by him in their promised Italy. Neither the invention nor the conduct
of this great action were owing to Homer, or any other poet. It is one
thing to copy, and another thing to imitate from nature. The copier
is that servile imitator, to whom Horace gives no better a name than
that of animal; he will not so much as allow him to be a man. Raphael
imitated nature; they who copy one of Raphael's pieces, imitate but
him; for his work is their original. They translate him, as I do
Virgil; and fall as short of him, as I of Virgil. There is a kind of
invention in the imitation of Raphael; for, though the thing was in
nature, yet the idea of it was his own. Ulysses travelled; so did
Æneas: but neither of them were the first travellers; for Cain went
into the land of Nod before they were born: and neither of the poets
ever heard of such a man. If Ulysses had been killed at Troy, yet Æneas
must have gone to sea, or he could never have arrived in Italy. But
the designs of the two poets were as different as the courses of their
heroes; one went home, and the other sought a home. To return to my
first similitude: suppose Apelles and Raphael had each of them painted
a burning Troy, might not the modern painter have succeeded as well as
the ancient, though neither of them had seen the town on fire? for the
draughts of both were taken from the ideas which they had of nature.
Cities had been burnt, before either of them were in being. But, to
close the simile as I began it; they would not have designed it after
the same manner: Apelles would have distinguished Pyrrhus from the rest
of all the Grecians, and shewed him forcing his entrance into Priam's
palace; there he had set him in the fairest light, and given him the
chief place of all his figures; because he was a Grecian, and he would
do honour to his country. Raphael, who was an Italian, and descended
from the Trojans, would have made Æneas the hero of his piece; and
perhaps not with his father on his back, his son in one hand, his
bundle of gods in the other, and his wife following; for an act of
piety is not half so graceful in a picture, as an act of courage: he
would rather have drawn him killing Androgeos, or some other, hand
to hand; and the blaze of the fires should have darted full upon his
face, to make him conspicuous amongst his Trojans. This, I think, is a
just comparison betwixt the two poets, in the conduct of their several
designs. Virgil cannot be said to copy Homer; the Grecian had only
the advantage of writing first. If it be urged, that I have granted a
resemblance in some parts, yet therein Virgil has excelled him. For,
what are the tears of Calypso for being left, to the fury and death
of Dido? Where is there the whole process of her passion, and all its
violent effects to be found, in the languishing episode of the Odysses?
If this be to copy, let the critics shew us the same dispositions,
features, or colouring, in their original. The like may be said of the
descent to hell, which was not of Homer's invention neither; he had it
from the story of Orpheus and Eurydice. But to what end did Ulysses
make that journey? Æneas undertook it by the express commandment of
his father's ghost; there he was to show him all the succeeding heroes
of his race, and, next to Romulus, (mark, if you please, the address
of Virgil,) his own patron, Augustus Cæsar. Anchises was likewise to
instruct him, how to manage the Italian war, and how to conclude it
with his honour; that is, in other words, to lay the foundations of
that empire which Augustus was to govern. This is the noble invention
of our author; but it hath been copied by so many sign-post daubers,
that now it is grown fulsome, rather by their want of skill, than by
the commonness.

In the last place, I may safely grant, that, by reading Homer, Virgil
was taught to imitate his invention--that is, to imitate like him;
which is no more than if a painter studied Raphael, that he might learn
to design after his manner. And thus I might imitate Virgil, if I were
capable of writing a heroic poem, and yet the invention be my own: but
I should endeavour to avoid a servile copying. I would not give the
same story under other names, with the same characters, in the same
order, and with the same sequel; for every common reader to find me out
at the first sight for a plagiary, and cry,--This I read before in
Virgil, in a better language, and in better verse. This is like Merry
Andrew on the low rope, copying lubberly the same tricks which his
master is so dexterously performing on the high.

I will trouble your lordship but with one objection more, which I
know not whether I found in Le Fèvre, or Valais; but I am sure I have
read it in another French critic, whom I will not name, because I
think it is not much for his reputation.[64] Virgil, in the heat of
action--suppose, for example, in describing the fury of his hero in
a battle, when he is endeavouring to raise our concernments to the
highest pitch--turns short on the sudden into some similitude, which
diverts, say they, your attention from the main subject, and mis spends
it on some trivial image. He pours cold water into the cauldron, when
his business is to make it boil.[65]

This accusation is general against all who would be thought heroic
poets; but I think it touches Virgil less than any. He is too great
a master of his art, to make a blot which may so easily be hit.
Similitudes, as I have said, are not for tragedy, which is all
violent, and where the passions are in a perpetual ferment; for there
they deaden where they should animate; they are not of the nature of
dialogue, unless in comedy: a metaphor is almost all the stage can
suffer, which is a kind of similitude comprehended in a word. But this
figure has a contrary effect in heroic poetry; there it is employed to
raise the admiration, which is its proper business; and admiration is
not of so violent a nature as fear or hope, compassion or horror, or
any concernment we can have for such or such a person on the stage. Not
but I confess, that similitudes and descriptions, when drawn into an
unreasonable length, must needs nauseate the reader. Once, I remember,
and but once, Virgil makes a similitude of fourteen lines; and his
description of Fame is about the same number. He is blamed for both;
and I doubt not but he would have contracted them, had he lived to have
reviewed his work; but faults are no precedents. This I have observed
of his similitudes in general, that they are not placed, as our
unobserving critics tell us, in the heat of any action, but commonly
in its declining. When he has warmed us in his description as much as
possibly he can, then, lest that warmth should languish, he renews it
by some apt similitude, which illustrates his subject, and yet palls
not his audience. I need give your lordship but one example of this
kind, and leave the rest to your observation, when next you review the
whole Æneïs in the original, unblemished by my rude translation. It
is in the first book, where the poet describes Neptune composing the
ocean, on which Æolus had raised a tempest without his permission.
He had already chidden the rebellious winds for obeying the commands
of their usurping master; he had warned them from the seas; he had
beaten down the billows with his mace, dispelled the clouds, restored
the sunshine, while Triton and Cymothoë were heaving the ships from
off the quick-sands, before the poet would offer at a similitude for
illustration:

  _Ac, veluti magno in populo cum sæpe coorta est
  Seditio, sævitque animis ignobile vulgus,_
  _Jamque faces et saxa volant; furor arma ministrat;
  Tum, pietate gravem ac meritis si forte virum quem
  Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus adstant;
  Ille regit dictis animos, et pectora mulcet:
  Sic cunctus pelagi cecidit fragor, æquora postquam
  Prospiciens genitor, cæloque invectus aperto,
  Flectit equos, currûque volans dat lora secundo._

This is the first similitude which Virgil makes in this poem, and one
of the longest in the whole; for which reason I the rather cite it.
While the storm was in its fury, any allusion had been improper; for
the poet could have compared it to nothing more impetuous than itself;
consequently he could have made no illustration. If he could have
illustrated, it had been an ambitious ornament out of season, and would
have diverted our concernment: _nunc non erat his locus_; and therefore
he deferred it to its proper place.[66]

These are the criticisms of most moment which have been made against
the Æneïs by the ancients or moderns. As for the particular exceptions
against this or that passage, Macrobius and Pontanus have answered them
already. If I desired to appear more learned than I am, it had been as
easy for me to have taken their objections and solutions, as it is for
a country parson to take the expositions of the fathers out of Junius
and Tremellius,[67] and not to have named the authors from whence
I had them; for so Ruæus, otherwise a most judicious commentator on
Virgil's works, has used Pontanus, his greatest benefactor; of whom he
is very silent; and I do not remember that he once cites him.

What follows next, is no objection; for that implies a fault: and it
had been none in Virgil, if he had extended the time of his action
beyond a year. At least Aristotle has set no precise limits to it.
Homer's, we know, was within two months: Tasso, I am sure, exceeds not
a summer; and, if I examined him, perhaps he might be reduced into a
much less compass. Bossu leaves it doubtful whether Virgil's action
were within the year, or took up some months beyond it. Indeed, the
whole dispute is of no more concernment to the common reader, than it
is to a ploughman, whether February this year had 28 or 29 days in it.
But, for the satisfaction of the more curious, (of which number I am
sure your lordship is one,) I will translate what I think convenient
out of Ségrais, whom perhaps you have not read; for he has made it
highly probable, that the action of the Æneïs began in the spring, and
was not extended beyond the autumn. And we have known campaigns that
have begun sooner, and have ended later.

Ronsard, and the rest whom Ségrais names, who are of opinion, that
the action of this poem takes up almost a year and half, ground their
calculation thus. Anchises died in Sicily at the end of winter, or
beginning of the spring. Æneas, immediately after the interment of his
father, puts to sea for Italy. He is surprised by the tempest described
in the beginning of the first book; and there it is that the scene
of the poem opens, and where the action must commence. He is driven
by this storm on the coasts of Afric; he stays at Carthage all that
summer, and almost all the winter following, sets sail again for Italy
just before the beginning of the spring, meets with contrary winds, and
makes Sicily the second time. This part of the action completes the
year. Then he celebrates the anniversary of his father's funeral, and
shortly after arrives at Cumæ; and from thence his time is taken up in
his first treaty with Latinus, the overture of the war, the siege of
his camp by Turnus, his going for succours to relieve it, his return,
the raising of the siege by the first battle, the twelve days' truce,
the second battle, the assault of Laurentum, and the single fight with
Turnus; all which, they say, cannot take up less than four or five
months more; by which account, we cannot suppose the entire action to
be contained in a much less compass than a year and half.

Ségrais reckons another way; and his computation is not condemned by
the learned Ruæus, who compiled and published the commentaries on our
poet, which we call the Dauphin's Virgil.

He allows the time of the year when Anchises died to be in the latter
end of winter, or the beginning of the spring: he acknowledges, that,
when Æneas is first seen at sea afterwards, and is driven by the
tempest on the coast of Afric, is the time when the action is naturally
to begin: he confesses, further, that Æneas left Carthage in the latter
end of winter; for Dido tells him in express terms, as an argument for
his longer stay,

  _Quinetiam hiberno moliris sidere classem._

But, whereas Ronsard's followers suppose, that, when Æneas had buried
his father, he set sail immediately for Italy, (though the tempest
drove him on the coast of Carthage,) Ségrais will by no means allow
that supposition, but thinks it much more probable, that he remained
in Sicily till the midst of July, or the beginning of August; at which
time he places the first appearance of his hero on the sea; and there
opens the action of the poem. From which beginning, to the death of
Turnus, which concludes the action, there need not be supposed above
ten months of intermediate time: for, arriving at Carthage in the
latter end of summer, staying there the winter following, departing
thence in the very beginning of the spring, making a short abode
in Sicily the second time, landing in Italy, and making the war,
may be reasonably judged the business but of ten months. To this
the Ronsardians reply, that, having been for seven years before in
quest of Italy, and having no more to do in Sicily than to inter his
father--after that office was performed, what remained for him, but,
without delay, to pursue his first adventure? To which Ségrais answers,
that the obsequies of his father, according to the rites of the Greeks
and Romans, would detain him for many days; that a longer time must be
taken up in the refitting of his ships after so tedious a voyage, and
in refreshing his weather-beaten soldiers on a friendly coast. These
indeed are but suppositions on both sides; yet those of Ségrais seem
better grounded: for the feast of Dido, when she entertained Æneas
first, has the appearance of a summer's night, which seems already
almost ended, when he begins his story; therefore the love was made in
autumn: the hunting followed properly when the heats of that scorching
country were declining; the winter was passed in jollity, as the season
and their love required; and he left her in the latter end of winter,
as is already proved. This opinion is fortified by the arrival of
Æneas at the mouth of Tyber; which marks the season of the spring; that
season being perfectly described by the singing of the birds saluting
the dawn, and by the beauty of the place, which the poet seems to have
painted expressly in the seventh Æneid:

  _Aurora in roseis fulgebat lutea bigis,
  Cum venti posuere.--------
  --------Variæ, circumque supraque,
  Assuetæ ripis volucres, et fluminis alveo,
  Æthera mulcebant cantu._------

The remainder of the action required but three months more: for,
when Æneas went for succour to the Tuscans, he found their army in a
readiness to march, and wanting only a commander: so that, according to
this calculation, the Æneïs takes not up above a year complete, and may
be comprehended in less compass.

This, amongst other circumstances treated more at large by Ségrais,
agrees with the rising of Orion, which caused the tempest described in
the beginning of the First Book. By some passages in the "Pastorals,"
but more particularly in the "Georgics," our poet is found to be an
exact astronomer, according to the knowledge of that age. Now Ilioneus
(whom Virgil twice employs in embassies, as the best speaker of the
Trojans) attributes that tempest to Orion, in his speech to Dido:

  _Cum, subito assurgens fluctu, nimbosus Orion_--

He must mean either the heliacal, or achronical rising of that sign.
The heliacal rising of a constellation is, when it comes from under the
rays of the sun, and begins to appear before day-light; the achronical
rising, on the contrary, is when it appears at the close of day, and in
opposition to the sun's diurnal course.

The heliacal rising of Orion is at present computed to be about the
sixth of July; and about that time it is, that he either causes or
presages tempests on the seas.

Ségrais has observed farther, that, when Anna counsels Dido to stay
Æneas during the winter, she speaks also of Orion--

  _Dum pelago desævit hiems, et aquosus Orion._

If therefore Ilioneus, according to our supposition, understand the
heliacal rising of Orion, Anna must mean the achronical, which the
different epithets given to that constellation seem to manifest.
Ilioneus calls him _nimbosus_; Anna, _aquosus_. He is tempestuous in
the summer, when he rises heliacally, and rainy in the winter, when
he rises achronically. Your lordship will pardon me for the frequent
repetition of these cant words, which I could not avoid in this
abbreviation of Ségrais, who, I think, deserves no little commendation
in this new criticism.[68]

I have yet a word or two to say of Virgil's machines, from my own
observation of them. He has imitated those of Homer, but not copied
them. It was established, long before this time, in the Roman religion
as well as in the Greek, that there were gods; and both nations, for
the most part, worshipped the same deities; as did also the Trojans,
from whom the Romans, I suppose, would rather be thought to derive the
rites of their religion, than from the Grecians; because they thought
themselves descended from them. Each of those gods had his proper
office, and the chief of them their particular attendants. Thus Jupiter
had in propriety Ganymede and Mercury, and Juno had Iris. It was not
for Virgil then to create new ministers: he must take what he found in
his religion. It cannot therefore be said, that he borrowed them from
Homer, any more than Apollo, Diana, and the rest, whom he uses as he
finds occasion for them, as the Grecian poet did; but he invents the
occasions for which he uses them. Venus, after the destruction of Troy,
had gained Neptune entirely to her party; therefore we find him busy in
the beginning of the Æneïs, to calm the tempest raised by Æolus, and
afterwards conducting the Trojan fleet to Cumæ in safety, with the loss
only of their pilot, for whom he bargains. I name those two examples
(amongst a hundred which I omit) to prove, that Virgil, generally
speaking, employed his machines in performing those things which might
possibly have been done without them. What more frequent than a storm
at sea, upon the rising of Orion? What wonder, if, amongst so many
ships, there should one be overset, which was commanded by Orontes,
though half the winds had not been there which Æolus employed? Might
not Palinurus, without a miracle, fall asleep, and drop into the sea,
having been over-wearied with watching, and secure of a quiet passage,
by his observation of the skies? At least Æneas, who knew nothing of
the machine of Somnus, takes it plainly in this sense:

  _O nimium cælo et pelago confise sereno,
  Nudus in ignotâ, Palinure, jacebis arenâ_.

But machines sometimes are specious things to amuse the reader, and
give a colour of probability to things otherwise incredible. And,
besides, it soothed the vanity of the Romans, to find the gods so
visibly concerned in all the actions of their predecessors. We, who
are better taught by our religion, yet own every wonderful accident,
which befals us for the best, to be brought to pass by some special
providence of Almighty God, and by the care of guardian angels: and
from hence I might infer, that no heroic poem can be writ on the
Epicurean principles; which I could easily demonstrate, if there were
need to prove it, or I had leisure.[69]

When Venus opens the eyes of her son Æneas, to behold the gods who
combated against Troy in that fatal night when it was surprised, we
share the pleasure of that glorious vision, (which Tasso has not ill
copied in the sacking of Jerusalem.) But the Greeks had done their
business, though neither Neptune, Juno, nor Pallas, had given them
their divine assistance. The most crude machine which Virgil uses, is
in the episode of Camilla, where Opis, by the command of her mistress,
kills Aruns. The next is in the twelfth Æneïd, where Venus cures
her son Æneas. But, in the last of these, the poet was driven to a
necessity; for Turnus was to be slain that very day; and Æneas, wounded
as he was, could not have engaged him in single combat, unless his hurt
had been miraculously healed. And the poet had considered, that the
dittany which she brought from Crete, could not have wrought so speedy
an effect, without the juice of ambrosia, which she mingled with it.
After all, that his machine might not seem too violent, we see the hero
limping after Turnus. The wound was skinned; but the strength of his
thigh was not restored. But what reason had our author to wound Æneas
at so critical a time? and how came the cuisses to be worse tempered
than the rest of his armour, which was all wrought by Vulcan and his
journeymen? These difficulties are not easily to be solved, without
confessing that Virgil had not life enough to correct his work; though
he had reviewed it, and found those errors, which he resolved to mend:
but, being prevented by death, and not willing to leave an imperfect
work behind him, he ordained, by his last testament, that his Æneïs
should be burned. As for the death of Aruns, who was shot by a goddess,
the machine was not altogether so outrageous, as the wounding Mars and
Venus by the sword of Diomede. Two divinities, one would have thought,
might have pleaded their prerogative of impassibility, or at least
not have been wounded by any mortal hand; beside that the ιχωρ, which
they shed, was so very like our common blood, that it was not to be
distinguished from it, but only by the name and colour. As for what
Horace says in his Art of Poetry, that no machines are to be used,
unless on some extraordinary occasion,

  _Nec deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus_--

that rule is to be applied to the theatre, of which he is then
speaking; and means no more than this, that, when the knot of the play
is to be untied, and no other way is left for making the discovery;
then, and not otherwise, let a god descend upon a rope, and clear the
business to the audience: but this has no relation to the machines
which are used in an epic poem.

In the last place, for the Dira, or flying pest, which, flapping on the
shield of Turnus, and fluttering about his head, disheartened him
in the duel, and presaged to him his approaching death, I might have
placed it more properly amongst the objections: for the critics, who
lay want of courage to the charge of Virgil's hero, quote this passage
as a main proof of their assertion. They say our author had not only
secured him before the duel, but also, in the beginning of it, had
given him the advantage in impenetrable arms, and in his sword; for
that of Turnus was not his own, which was forged by Vulcan for his
father, but a weapon which he had snatched in haste, and by mistake,
belonging to his charioteer Metiscus; that, after all this, Jupiter,
who was partial to the Trojan, and distrustful of the event, though
he had hung the balance, and given it a jog of his hand to weigh down
Turnus, thought convenient to give the Fates a collateral security, by
sending the screech-owl to discourage him: for which they quote these
words of Virgil,

      ----_Non me tua turbida virtus
  Terret, ait: dî me terrent, et Jupiter hostis_.[70]

In answer to which, I say, that this machine is one of those which the
poet uses only for ornament, and not out of necessity. Nothing can be
more beautiful or more poetical than his description of the three Diræ,
or the setting of the balance, which our Milton has borrowed from him,
but employed to a different end: for, first, he makes God Almighty set
the scales for St Gabriel and Satan, when he knew no combat was to
follow; then he makes the good angel's scale descend, and the Devil's
mount, quite contrary to Virgil, if I have translated the three verses
according to my author's sense:

  _Jupiter ipse duas æquato examine lances
  Sustinet; et fata imponit diversa duorum;
  Quem damnet labor, et quo vergat pondere letum_.

for I have taken these words, _quem damnet labor_, in the sense which
Virgil gives them in another place,--_damnabis tu quoque votis_,--to
signify a prosperous event. Yet I dare not condemn so great a genius as
Milton: for I am much mistaken if he alludes not to the text in Daniel,
where Belshazzar was put into the balance, and found too light.--This
is digression; and I return to my subject. I said above, that these
two machines of the balance and the Dira were only ornamental, and
that the success of the duel had been the same without them: for, when
Æneas and Turnus stood fronting each other before the altar, Turnus
looked dejected, and his colour faded in his face, as if he desponded
of the victory before the fight; and not only he, but all his party,
when the strength of the two champions was judged by the proportion of
their limbs, concluded it was _impar pugna_, and that their chief was
overmatched: whereupon Juturna (who was of the same opinion) took this
opportunity to break the treaty and renew the war. Juno herself had
plainly told the nymph beforehand, that her brother was to fight

  _Imparibus fatis, nec dîs nec viribus æquis_;

so that there was no need of an apparition to fright Turnus: he had the
presage within himself of his impending destiny. The Dira only served
to confirm him in his first opinion, that it was his destiny to die in
the ensuing combat; and in this sense are those words of Virgil to be
taken,

                ----_Non me tua turbida virtus
  Terret, ait: dî me terrent, et Jupiter hostis_.[71]

I doubt not but the adverb _solum_ is to be understood; "It is not
your [valour] _only_ that gives me this concernment; but I find also,
by this portent, that Jupiter is my enemy:" for Turnus fled before,
when his first sword was broken, till his sister supplied him with a
better; which indeed he could not use, because Æneas kept him at a
distance with his spear. I wonder Ruæus saw not this, where he charges
his author so unjustly, for giving Turnus a second sword to no purpose.
How could he fasten a blow, or make a thrust, when he was not suffered
to approach? Besides, the chief errand of the Dira was to warn Juturna
from the field; for she could have brought the chariot again, when she
saw her brother worsted in the duel. I might farther add, that Æneas
was so eager of the fight, that he left the city, now almost in his
possession, to decide his quarrel with Turnus by the sword: whereas
Turnus had manifestly declined the combat, and suffered his sister to
convey him as far from the reach of his enemy as she could--I say, not
only suffered her, but consented to it; for it is plain, he knew her,
by these words:

  _O soror, et dudum agnovi, cum prima per artem
  Fœdera turbâsti, teque hæc in bella dedisti;
  Et nunc necquidquam fallis dea_.----

I have dwelt so long on this subject, that I must contract what I have
to say in reference to my translation, unless I would swell my preface
into a volume, and make it formidable to your lordship, when you see so
many pages yet behind. And indeed what I have already written, either
in justification or praise of Virgil, is against myself, for presuming
to copy, in my coarse English, the thoughts and beautiful expressions
of this inimitable poet, who flourished in an age when his language was
brought to its last perfection, for which it was particularly owing
to him and Horace. I will give your lordship my opinion, that those
two friends had consulted each other's judgment, wherein they should
endeavour to excel; and they seem to have pitched on propriety of
thought, elegance of words, and harmony of numbers. According to this
model, Horace writ his Odes and Epodes: for his Satires and Epistles,
being intended wholly for instruction, required another style--

  _Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri_--

and therefore, as he himself professes, are _sermoni propiora_, nearer
prose than verse. But Virgil, who never attempted the lyric verse, is
everywhere elegant, sweet, and flowing in his hexameters. His words
are not only chosen, but the places in which he ranks them for the
sound. He who removes them from the station wherein their master set
them, spoils the harmony. What he says of the Sibyl's prophecies, may
be as properly applied to every word of his: they must be read in
order as they lie; the least breath discomposes them; and somewhat of
their divinity is lost. I cannot boast that I have been thus exact in
my verses; but I have endeavoured to follow the example of my master,
and am the first Englishman, perhaps, who made it his design to copy
him in his numbers, his choice of words, and his placing them for the
sweetness of the sound. On this last consideration, I have shunned
the _cæsura_ as much as possibly I could: for, wherever that is used,
it gives a roughness to the verse; of which we can have little need
in a language which is overstocked with consonants.[72] Such is not
the Latin, where the vowels and consonants are mixed in proportion
to each other: yet Virgil judged the vowels to have somewhat of an
over-balance, and therefore tempers their sweetness with _cæsuras_.
Such difference there is in tongues, that the same figure, which
roughens one, gives majesty to another: and that was it which Virgil
studied in his verses. Ovid uses it but rarely; and hence it is that
his versification cannot so properly be called sweet, as luscious.
The Italians are forced upon it once or twice in every line, because
they have a redundancy of vowels in their language. Their metal is
so soft, that it will not coin without alloy to harden it. On the
other side, for the reason already named, it is all we can do to give
sufficient sweetness to our language: we must not only chuse our
words for elegance, but for sound; to perform which, a mastery in the
language is required; the poet must have a magazine of words, and have
the art to manage his few vowels to the best advantage, that they may
go the farther. He must also know the nature of the vowels--which are
more sonorous, and which more soft and sweet--and so dispose them as
his present occasions require: all which, and a thousand secrets of
versification beside, he may learn from Virgil, if he will take him for
his guide. If he be above Virgil, and is resolved to follow his own
_verve_, (as the French call it,) the proverb will fall heavily upon
him:--"Who teaches himself, has a fool for his master."

Virgil employed eleven years upon his Æneïs; yet he left it, as he
thought himself, imperfect; which when I seriously consider, I wish,
that, instead of three years which I have spent in the translation
of his works, I had four years more allowed me to correct my errors,
that I might make my version somewhat more tolerable than it is: for a
poet cannot have too great a reverence for his readers, if he expects
his labours should survive him. Yet I will neither plead my age nor
sickness, in excuse of the faults which I have made: that I wanted
time, is all that I have to say; for some of my subscribers grew so
clamorous, that I could no longer defer the publication. I hope, from
the candour of your lordship, and your often experienced goodness to
me, that, if the faults are not too many, you will make allowances with
Horace:

  ----si _plura nitent in carmine, non ego paucis
  Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
  Aut humana parum cavit natura_.--

You may please also to observe, that there is not, to the best of
my remembrance, one vowel gaping on another for want of a _cæsura_,
in this whole poem: but, where a vowel ends a word, the next begins
either with a consonant, or what is its equivalent; for our _W_ and
_H_ aspirate, and our diphthongs, are plainly such. The greatest
latitude I take is in the letter _Y_, when it concludes a word, and the
first syllable of the next begins with a vowel. Neither need I have
called this a latitude, which is only an explanation of this general
rule--that no vowel can be cut off before another, when we cannot
sink the pronunciation of it; as _he_, _she_, _me_, _I_, &c. Virgil
thinks it sometimes a beauty to imitate the licence of the Greeks, and
leave two vowels opening on each other, as in that verse of the Third
Pastoral,

  _Et succus pecori, et lac subducitur agnis_.

But, _nobis non licet esse tam disertis_, at least if we study to
refine our numbers. I have long had by me the materials of an English
_Prosodia_, containing all the mechanical rules of versification,
wherein I have treated, with some exactness, of the feet, the
quantities, and the pauses. The French and Italians know nothing of the
two first; at least their best poets have not practised them. As for
the pauses, Malherbe first brought them into France within this last
century; and we see how they adorn their Alexandrines. But, as Virgil
propounds a riddle, which he leaves unsolved--

  _Dic, quibus in terris, inscripti nomina regum
  Nascantur flores; et Phyllida solus habeto_--

so I will give your lordship another, and leave the exposition of it
to your acute judgment. I am sure there are few who make verses, have
observed the sweetness of these two lines in Cooper's Hill:

  Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull;
  Strong without rage; without o'erflowing, full--[73]

and there are yet fewer who can find the reason of that sweetness. I
have given it to some of my friends in conversation; and they have
allowed the criticism to be just. But, since the evil of false
quantities is difficult to be cured in any modern language; since the
French and the Italians, as well as we, are yet ignorant what feet
are to be used in heroic poetry; since I have not strictly observed
those rules myself, which I can teach others; since I pretend to no
dictatorship among my fellow-poets; since, if I should instruct some
of them to make well-running verses, they want genius to give them
strength as well as sweetness; and, above all, since your lordship has
advised me not to publish that little which I know, I look on your
counsel as your command, which I shall observe inviolably, till you
shall please to revoke it, and leave me at liberty to make my thoughts
public. In the mean time, that I may arrogate nothing to myself, I
must acknowledge that Virgil in Latin, and Spenser in English, have
been my masters. Spenser has also given me the boldness to make use
sometimes of his Alexandrine line, which we call, though improperly,
the Pindaric, because Mr Cowley has often employed it in his Odes. It
adds a certain majesty to the verse, when it is used with judgment,
and stops the sense from overflowing into another line. Formerly the
French, like us, and the Italians, had but five feet, or ten syllables,
in their heroic verse; but, since Ronsard's time, as I suppose, they
found their tongue too weak to support their epic poetry, without the
addition of another foot. That indeed has given it somewhat of the
run and measure of a trimeter; but it runs with more activity than
strength: their language is not strung with sinews, like our English;
it has the nimbleness of a greyhound, but not the bulk and body of a
mastiff. Our men and our verses overbear them by their weight; and
_Pondere, non numero_, is the British motto. The French have set up
purity for the standard of their language; and a masculine vigour is
that of ours. Like their tongue, is the genius of their poets, light
and trifling in comparison of the English; more proper for sonnets,
madrigals, and elegies, than heroic poetry. The turn on thoughts and
words is their chief talent; but the epic poem is too stately to
receive those little ornaments. The painters draw their nymphs in thin
and airy habits; but the weight of gold and of embroideries is reserved
for queens and goddesses. Virgil is never frequent in those turns, like
Ovid, but much more sparing of them in his Æneïs, than in his Pastorals
and Georgics.

  _Ignoscenda quidem, scirent si ignoscere manes._

That turn is beautiful indeed; but he employs it in the story of
Orpheus and Eurydice, not in his great poem. I have used that licence
in his Æneïs sometimes; but I own it as my fault. It was given to those
who understand no better. It is like Ovid's

  _Semivirumque bovem, semibovemque virum_.

The poet found it before his critics, but it was a darling sin, which
he would not be persuaded to reform. The want of genius, of which I
have accused the French, is laid to their charge by one of their own
great authors, though I have forgotten his name, and where I read
it. If rewards could make good poets, their great master[74] has not
been wanting on his part in his bountiful encouragements: for he is
wise enough to imitate Augustus, if he had a Maro. The triumvir and
proscriber had descended to us in a more hideous form than they now
appear, if the emperor had not taken care to make friends of him and
Horace. I confess, the banishment of Ovid was a blot in his escutcheon:
yet he was only banished; and who knows but his crime was capital, and
then his exile was a favour? Ariosto, who, with all his faults, must
be acknowledged a great poet, has put these words into the mouth of an
evangelist:[75] but whether they will pass for gospel now, I cannot
tell.

  _Non fù si santo ni benigno Augusto,
  Come la tuba di Virgilio suona.
  L'haver havuto in poesia buon gusto,
  La proscrittione iniqua gli perdona._

But heroic poetry is not of the growth of France, as it might be of
England, if it were cultivated. Spenser wanted only to have read the
rules of Bossu; for no man was ever born with a greater genius, or
had more knowledge to support it. But the performance of the French
is not equal to their skill; and hitherto we have wanted skill to
perform better. Ségrais, whose preface is so wonderfully good, yet
is wholly destitute of elevation, though his version is much better
than that of the two brothers, or any of the rest who have attempted
Virgil. Hannibal Caro is a great name amongst the Italians; yet his
translation of the Æneïs is most scandalously mean, though he has taken
the advantage of writing in blank verse, and freed himself from the
shackles of modern rhyme, if it be modern; for Le Clerc has told us
lately, and I believe has made it out, that David's Psalms were written
in as errant rhyme as they are translated. Now, if a Muse cannot run
when she is unfettered, it is a sign she has but little speed. I will
not make a digression here, though I am strangely tempted to it; but
will only say, that he who can write well in rhyme, may write better
in blank verse.[76] Rhyme is certainly a constraint even to the best
poets, and those who make it with most ease; though perhaps I have
as little reason to complain of that hardship as any man, excepting
Quarles and Withers. What it adds to sweetness, it takes away from
sense; and he who loses the least by it, may be called a gainer. It
often makes us swerve from an author's meaning; as, if a mark be set up
for an archer at a great distance, let him aim as exactly as he can,
the least wind will take his arrow, and divert it from the white.--I
return to our Italian translator of the Æneïs. He is a foot-poet, he
lacquies by the side of Virgil at the best, but never mounts behind
him. Doctor Morelli,[77] who is no mean critic in our poetry, and
therefore may be presumed to be a better in his own language, has
confirmed me in this opinion by his judgment, and thinks, withal, that
he has often mistaken his master's sense. I would say so, if I durst,
but am afraid I have committed the same fault more often, and more
grossly; for I have forsaken Ruæus, (whom generally I follow,) in many
places, and made expositions of my own in some, quite contrary to him;
of which I will give but two examples, because they are so near each
other, in the Tenth Æneid--

  ---- ----_Sorti Pater æquus utrique_.

Pallas says it to Turnus, just before they fight. Ruæus thinks that the
word _Pater_ is to be referred to Evander, the father of Pallas. But
how could he imagine that it was the same thing to Evander, if his son
were slain, or if he overcame? The poet certainly intended Jupiter,
the common father of mankind; who, as Pallas hoped, would stand an
impartial spectator of the combat, and not be more favourable to Turnus
than to him. The second is not long after it, and both before the duel
is begun. They are the words of Jupiter, who comforts Hercules for the
death of Pallas, which was immediately to ensue, and which Hercules
could not hinder, (though the young hero had addressed his prayers to
him for his assistance) because the gods cannot controul destiny. The
verse follows:

  _Sic ait; atque oculos Rutulorum rejicit arvis_,--

which the same Ruæus thus construes: Jupiter, after he had said this,
immediately turns his eyes to the Rutulian fields, and beholds the
duel. I have given this place another exposition, that he turned his
eyes from the field of combat, that he might not behold a sight so
unpleasing to him. The word _rejicit_, I know, will admit of both
senses; but Jupiter, having confessed that he could not alter fate,
and being grieved he could not, in consideration of Hercules--it seems
to me that he should avert his eyes, rather than take pleasure in the
spectacle. But of this I am not so confident as the other, though I
think I have followed Virgil's sense.[78]

What I have said, though it has the face of arrogance, yet is intended
for the honour of my country; and therefore I will boldly own, that
this English translation has more of Virgil's spirit in it, than either
the French or the Italian. Some of our countrymen have translated
episodes and other parts of Virgil, with great success; as particularly
your lordship, whose version of Orpheus and Eurydice is eminently good.
Amongst the dead authors, the Silenus of my Lord Roscommon cannot be
too much commended. I say nothing of Sir John Denham, Mr Waller, and
Mr Cowley;[79] it is the utmost of my ambition to be thought their
equal, or not to be much inferior to them, and some others of the
living. But it is one thing to take pains on a fragment, and translate
it perfectly; and another thing to have the weight of a whole author
on my shoulders. They who believe the burden light, let them attempt
the fourth, sixth, or eighth Pastoral; the first or fourth Georgic;
and, amongst the Æneïds, the fourth, the fifth, the seventh, the ninth,
the tenth, the eleventh, or the twelfth; for in these I think I have
succeeded best.

Long before I undertook this work, I was no stranger to the original. I
had also studied Virgil's design, his disposition of it, his manners,
his judicious management of the figures, the sober retrenchments of
his sense, which always leave somewhat to gratify our imagination, on
which it may enlarge at pleasure; but, above all, the elegance of his
expressions, and the harmony of his numbers: for, as I have said in a
former dissertation, the words are, in poetry, what the colours are in
painting; if the design be good, and the draught be true, the colouring
is the first beauty that strikes the eye.[80] Spenser and Milton are
the nearest, in English, to Virgil and Horace in the Latin; and I have
endeavoured to form my style by imitating their masters. I will further
own to you, my lord, that my chief ambition is to please those readers
who have discernment enough to prefer Virgil before any other poet in
the Latin tongue. Such spirits as he desired to please, such would I
chuse for my judges, and would stand or fall by them alone. Ségrais has
distinguished the readers of poetry, according to their capacity of
judging, into three classes; (he might have said the same of writers
too, if he had pleased.) In the lowest form he places those whom he
calls _les petits esprits_--such things as are our upper-gallery
audience in a playhouse, who like nothing but the husk and rind of
wit; prefer a quibble, a conceit, an epigram, before solid sense and
elegant expression; these are mob readers. If Virgil and Martial stood
for parliament-men, we know already who would carry it. But, though
they make the greatest appearance in the field, and cry the loudest,
the best on't is, they are but a sort of French Huguenots, or Dutch
boors, brought over in herds, but not naturalized; who have not land
of two pounds per annum in Parnassus, and therefore are not privileged
to poll. Their authors are of the same level, fit to represent them
on a mountebank's stage, or to be masters of the ceremonies in a
bear-garden. Yet these are they who have the most admirers. But it
often happens, to their mortification, that, as their readers improve
their stock of sense, (as they may by reading better books, and by
conversation with men of judgment,) they soon forsake them: and when
the torrent from the mountains falls no more, the swelling writer is
reduced into his shallow bed, like the Mançanares at Madrid, with
scarce water to moisten his own pebbles.[81] There are a middle sort
of readers, (as we hold there is a middle state of souls,) such as
have a farther insight than the former, yet have not the capacity of
judging right; for I speak not of those who are bribed by a party, and
know better, if they were not corrupted; but I mean a company of warm
young men, who are not yet arrived so far as to discern the difference
betwixt fustian, or ostentatious sentences, and the true sublime. These
are above liking Martial, or Owen's Epigrams, but they would certainly
set Virgil below Statius or Lucan. I need not say their poets are of
the same taste with their admirers. They affect greatness in all they
write; but it is a bladdered greatness, like that of the vain man whom
Seneca describes--an ill habit of body, full of humours, and swelled
with dropsy. Even these too desert their authors, as their judgment
ripens. The young gentlemen themselves are commonly misled by their
pedagogue at school, their tutor at the university, or their governor
in their travels: and many of those three sorts are the most positive
blockheads in the world. How many of those flatulent writers have I
known, who have sunk in their reputation, after seven or eight editions
of their works! for indeed they are poets only for young men. They had
great success at their first appearance; but, not being of God, (as a
wit said formerly,) they could not stand.

I have already named two sorts of judges; but Virgil wrote for neither
of them: and, by his example, I am not ambitious of pleasing the lowest
or the middle form of readers.

He chose to please the most judicious--souls of the highest rank,
and truest understanding. These are few in number; but whoever is so
happy as to gain their approbation, can never lose it, because they
never give it blindly. Then they have a certain magnetism in their
judgment, which attracts others to their sense. Every day they gain
some new proselyte, and in time become the church. For this reason, a
well-weighed judicious poem, which at its first appearance gains no
more upon the world than to be just received, and rather not blamed
than much applauded, insinuates itself by insensible degrees into the
liking of the reader: the more he studies it, the more it grows upon
him; every time he takes it up, he discovers some new graces in it.
And whereas poems, which are produced by the vigour of imagination
only, have a gloss upon them at the first, which time wears off; the
works of judgment are like the diamond; the more they are polished, the
more lustre they receive. Such is the difference betwixt Virgil's Æneïs
and Marini's Adone. And, if I may be allowed to change the metaphor, I
would say, that Virgil is like the Fame which he describes:

  _Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo_.

Such a sort of reputation is my aim, though in a far inferior degree,
according to my motto in the title-page--_Sequiturque patrem non
passibus æquis_: and therefore I appeal to the highest court of
judicature, like that of the peers, of which your lordship is so great
an ornament.

Without this ambition, which I own, of desiring to please the _judices
natos_, I could never have been able to have done any thing at this
age, when the fire of poetry is commonly extinguished in other men.
Yet Virgil has given me the example of Entellus for my encouragement:
when he was well heated, the younger champion could not stand before
him. And we find the elder contended not for the gift, but for the
honour--_nec dona moror_: for Dampier has informed us, in his voyages,
that the air of the country which produces gold, is never wholesome.

I had long since considered, that the way to please the best judges is
not to translate a poet literally, and Virgil least of any other: for,
his peculiar beauty lying in his choice of words, I am excluded from it
by the narrow compass of our heroic verse, unless I would make use of
monosyllables only, and those clogged with consonants, which are the
dead weight of our mother-tongue. It is possible, I confess, though it
rarely happens, that a verse of monosyllables may sound harmoniously;
and some examples of it I have seen. My first line of the Æneïs is not
harsh--

  Arms, and the man I sing, who, forced by fate, &c.

But a much better instance may be given from the last line of Manilius,
made English by our learned and judicious Mr Creech--

  Nor could the world have borne so fierce a flame--

where the many liquid consonants are placed so artfully, that they give
a pleasing sound to the words, though they are all of one syllable.

It is true, I have been sometimes forced upon it in other places of
this work: but I never did it out of choice; I was either in haste, or
Virgil gave me no occasion for the ornament of words; for it seldom
happens but a monosyllable line turns verse to prose; and even that
prose is rugged and unharmonious. Philarchus, I remember, taxes Balzac
for placing twenty monosyllables in file, without one dissyllable
betwixt them. The way I have taken is not so strait as metaphrase,
nor so loose as paraphrase: some things too I have omitted, and
sometimes have added of my own. Yet the omissions, I hope, are but of
circumstances, and such as would have no grace in English; and the
additions, I also hope, are easily deduced from Virgil's sense. They
will seem, (at least I have the vanity to think so,) not stuck into
him, but growing out of him. He studies brevity more than any other
poet: but he had the advantage of a language wherein much may be
comprehended in a little space. We, and all the modern tongues, have
more articles and pronouns, besides signs of tenses and cases, and
other barbarities on which our speech is built by the faults of our
forefathers. The Romans founded theirs upon the Greek: and the Greeks,
we know, were labouring many hundred years upon their language, before
they brought it to perfection. They rejected all those signs, and cut
off as many articles as they could spare; comprehending in one word
what we are constrained to express in two, which is one reason why we
cannot write so concisely as they have done. The word _pater_, for
example, signifies not only _a_ father, but _your_ father, _my_ father,
_his_ or _her_ father, all included in a word.

This inconvenience is common to all modern tongues; and this alone
constrains us to employ more words than the ancients needed. But,
having before observed, that Virgil endeavours to be short, and at the
same time elegant, I pursue the excellence, and forsake the brevity:
for there he is like ambergris, a rich perfume, but of so close and
glutinous a body, that it must be opened with inferior scents of musk
or civet, or the sweetness will not be drawn out into another language.

On the whole matter, I thought fit to steer betwixt the two extremes
of paraphrase and literal translation; to keep as near my author as I
could, without losing all his graces, the most eminent of which are
in the beauty of his words; and those words, I must add, are always
figurative. Such of these as would retain their elegance in our tongue,
I have endeavoured to graff on it; but most of them are of necessity
to be lost, because they will not shine in any but their own. Virgil
has sometimes two of them in a line; but the scantiness of our heroic
verse is not capable of receiving more than one; and that too must
expiate for many others which have none. Such is the difference of
the languages, or such my want of skill in chusing words. Yet I
may presume to say, and I hope with as much reason as the French
translator, that, taking all the materials of this divine author, I
have endeavoured to make Virgil speak such English as he would himself
have spoken, if he had been born in England, and in this present age.
I acknowledge, with Ségrais, that I have not succeeded in this attempt
according to my desire: yet I shall not be wholly without praise, if in
some sort I may be allowed to have copied the clearness, the purity,
the easiness, and the magnificence, of his style. But I shall have
occasion to speak farther on this subject before I end the Preface.

When I mentioned the Pindaric line, I should have added, that I take
another licence in my verses: for I frequently make use of triplet
rhymes, and for the same reason, because they bound the sense. And
therefore I generally join these two licences together, and make the
last verse of the triplet a Pindaric:[82] for, besides the majesty
which it gives, it confines the sense within the barriers of three
lines, which would languish if it were lengthened into four. Spenser
is my example for both these privileges of English verses; and Chapman
has followed him in his translation of Homer. Mr Cowley has given
into them after both; and all succeeding writers after him. I regard
them now as the _Magna Charta_ of heroic poetry, and am too much an
Englishman to lose what my ancestors have gained for me. Let the
French and Italians value themselves on their regularity; strength and
elevation are our standard. I said before, and I repeat it, that the
affected purity of the French has unsinewed their heroic verse. The
language of an epic poem is almost wholly figurative: yet they are so
fearful of a metaphor, that no example of Virgil can encourage them to
be bold with safety. Sure they might warm themselves by that sprightly
blaze, without approaching it so close as to singe their wings; they
may come as near it as their master. Not that I would discourage that
purity of diction in which he excels all other poets. But he knows
how far to extend his franchises, and advances to the verge, without
venturing a foot beyond it. On the other side, without being injurious
to the memory of our English Pindar, I will presume to say, that his
metaphors are sometimes too violent, and his language is not always
pure. But, at the same time, I must excuse him; for, through the
iniquity of the times, he was forced to travel, at an age when, instead
of learning foreign languages, he should have studied the beauties of
his mother-tongue, which, like all other speeches, is to be cultivated
early, or we shall never write it with any kind of elegance.[83] Thus,
by gaining abroad, he lost at home; like the painter in the "Arcadia,"
who, going to see a skirmish, had his arms lopped off, and returned,
says Sir Philip Sidney, well instructed how to draw a battle, but
without a hand to perform his work.

There is another thing in which I have presumed to deviate from him
and Spenser. They both make hemisticks, (or half verses,) breaking
off in the middle of a line. I confess there are not many such in the
"Fairy Queen;" and even those few might be occasioned by his unhappy
choice of so long a stanza. Mr Cowley had found out, that no kind of
staff is proper for a heroic poem, as being all too lyrical: yet,
though he wrote in couplets, where rhyme is freer from constraint, he
frequently affects half verses; of which we find not one in Homer,
and I think not in any of the Greek poets, or the Latin, excepting
only Virgil; and there is no question but he thought he had Virgil's
authority for that licence. But, I am confident, our poet never meant
to leave him, or any other, such a precedent: and I ground my opinion
on these two reasons: first, we find no example of a hemistick in any
of his Pastorals or Georgics; for he had given the last finishing
strokes to both these poems: but his Æneïs he left so incorrect, at
least so short of that perfection at which he aimed, that we know
how hard a sentence he passed upon it: and, in the second place, I
reasonably presume, that he intended to have filled up all those
hemisticks, because in one of them we find the sense imperfect:

  _Quem tibi jam Trojâ_----

which some foolish grammarian has ended for him with a half line of
nonsense:

  ----_peperit fumante Crëusa_:

for Ascanius must have been born some years before the burning of that
city; which I need not prove. On the other side, we find also, that he
himself filled up one line in the Sixth Æneïd, the enthusiasm seizing
him, while he was reading to Augustus:

  _Misenum Æolidem, quo non præstantior alter
  Ære ciere viros_----

to which he added, in that transport, _Martemque accendere cantu_: and
never was any line more nobly finished; for the reasons which I have
given in the Book of Painting. On these considerations I have shunned
hemisticks; not being willing to imitate Virgil to a fault, like
Alexander's courtiers, who affected to hold their necks awry, because
he could not help it.[84] I am confident your lordship is by this time
of my opinion, and that you will look on those half lines hereafter, as
the imperfect products of a hasty Muse: like the frogs and serpents in
the Nile; part of them kindled into life, and part a lump of unformed
unanimated mud.

I am sensible that many of my whole verses are as imperfect as those
halves, for want of time to digest them better: but give me leave to
make the excuse of Boccace, who, when he was upbraided that some of
his novels had not the spirit of the rest, returned this answer, that
Charlemagne, who made the paladins, was never able to raise an army
of them. The leaders may be heroes, but the multitude must consist of
common men.

I am also bound to tell your lordship, in my own defence, that, from
the beginning of the First Georgic to the end of the last Æneïd, I
found the difficulty of translation growing on me in every succeeding
book: for Virgil, above all poets, had a stock, which I may call
almost inexhaustible, of figurative, elegant, and sounding words. I,
who inherit but a small portion of his genius, and write in a language
so much inferior to the Latin, have found it very painful to vary
phrases, when the same sense returns upon me. Even he himself, whether
out of necessity or choice, has often expressed the same thing in the
same words, and often repeated two or three whole verses, which he had
used before. Words are not so easily coined as money; and yet we see
that the credit, not only of banks, but of exchequers, cracks, when
little comes in, and much goes out. Virgil called upon me in every line
for some new word: and I paid so long, that I was almost bankrupt; so
that the latter end must needs be more burdensome than the beginning
or the middle; and, consequently, the twelfth Æneïd cost me double the
time of the first and second. What had become of me, if Virgil had
taxed me with another book? I had certainly been reduced to pay the
public in hammered money, for want of milled; that is, in the same old
words which I had used before: and the receivers must have been forced
to have taken any thing, where there was so little to be had.[85]

Besides this difficulty (with which I have struggled, and made a shift
to pass it over,) there is one remaining, which is insuperable to
all translators. We are bound to our author's sense, though with the
latitudes already mentioned; for I think it not so sacred, as that one
_iota_ must not be added or diminished, on pain of an _anathema_. But
slaves we are, and labour on another man's plantation; we dress the
vineyard, but the wine is the owner's: if the soil be sometimes barren,
then we are sure of being scourged: if it be fruitful, and our care
succeeds, we are not thanked; for the proud reader will only say, the
poor drudge has done his duty. But this is nothing to what follows;
for, being obliged to make his sense intelligible, we are forced to
untune our own verses, that we may give his meaning to the reader. He,
who invents, is master of his thoughts and words: he can turn and vary
them as he pleases, till he renders them harmonious; but the wretched
translator has no such privilege: for, being tied to the thoughts, he
must make what music he can in the expression; and, for this reason, it
cannot always be so sweet as that of the original. There is a beauty of
sound, as Ségrais has observed, in some Latin words, which is wholly
lost in any modern language. He instances in that _mollis amaracus_, on
which Venus lays Cupid, in the First Æneïd. If I should translate it
_sweet-marjoram,_ as the word signifies, the reader would think I had
mistaken Virgil: for those village-words, as I may call them, give us
a mean idea of the thing; but the sound of the Latin is so much more
pleasing, by the just mixture of the vowels with the consonants, that
it raises our fancies to conceive somewhat more noble than a common
herb, and to spread roses under him, and strew lilies over him; a bed
not unworthy the grandson of the goddess.

If I cannot copy his harmonious numbers, how shall I imitate his noble
flights, where his thoughts and words are equally sublime? _Quem_

  ----_quisquis studet æmulari,
  ----cæratis ope Dædaleâ
  Nititur pennis, vitreo daturus
      Nomina ponto_.

What modern language, or what poet, can express the majestic beauty of
this one verse, amongst a thousand others?

  _Aude, hospes, contemnere opes, et te quoque dignum
  Finge deo._----

For my part, I am lost in the admiration of it: I contemn the world
when I think on it, and myself when I translate it.[86]

Lay by Virgil, I beseech your lordship, and all my better sort of
judges, when you take up my version; and it will appear a passable
beauty when the original Muse is absent. But, like Spenser's false
Florimel made of snow, it melts and vanishes when the true one comes
in sight. I will not excuse, but justify myself, for one pretended
crime, with which I am liable to be charged by false critics, not only
in this translation, but in many of my original poems--that I latinize
too much. It is true, that, when I find an English word significant and
sounding, I neither borrow from the Latin, nor any other language; but,
when I want at home, I must seek abroad.

If sounding words are not of our growth and manufacture, who shall
hinder me to import them from a foreign country? I carry not out the
treasure of the nation, which is never to return; but what I bring from
Italy, I spend in England: here it remains, and here it circulates;
for, if the coin be good, it will pass from one hand to another. I
trade both with the living and the dead, for the enrichment of our
native language. We have enough in England to supply our necessity;
but, if we will have things of magnificence and splendour, we must get
them by commerce. Poetry requires ornament; and that is not to be had
from our old Teuton monosyllables: therefore, if I find any elegant
word in a classic author, I propose it to be naturalized, by using
it myself; and, if the public approves of it, the bill passes. But
every man cannot distinguish between pedantry and poetry: every man,
therefore, is not fit to innovate. Upon the whole matter, a poet must
first be certain that the word he would introduce is beautiful in the
Latin, and is to consider, in the next place, whether it will agree
with the English idiom: after this, he ought to take the opinion of
judicious friends, such as are learned in both languages: and, lastly,
since no man is infallible, let him use this licence very sparingly;
for, if too many foreign words are poured in upon us, it looks as if
they were designed not to assist the natives, but to conquer them.

I am now drawing towards a conclusion, and suspect your lordship is
very glad of it. But permit me first to own what helps I have had in
this undertaking. The late Earl of Lauderdale[87] sent me over his new
translation of the Æneïs, which he had ended before I engaged in the
same design. Neither did I then intend it: but, some proposals being
afterwards made me by my bookseller, I desired his lordship's leave
that I might accept them, which he freely granted; and I have his
letter yet to show for that permission. He resolved to have printed
his work, (which he might have done two years before I could publish
mine,) and had performed it if death had not prevented him. But, having
his manuscript in my hands, I consulted it as often as I doubted of my
author's sense; for no man understood Virgil better than that learned
nobleman. His friends, I hear, have yet another and more correct copy
of that translation by them, which, had they pleased to have given the
public, the judges must have been convinced that I have not flattered
him. Besides this help, which was not inconsiderable, Mr Congreve has
done me the favour to review the Æneïs, and compare my version with the
original. I shall never be ashamed to own, that this excellent young
man has shewed me many faults, which I have endeavoured to correct. It
is true, he might have easily found more, and then my translation had
been more perfect.

Two other worthy friends of mine, who desire to have their names
concealed, seeing me straitened in my time, took pity on me, and gave
me the "Life of Virgil," the two prefaces to the "Pastorals" and the
"Georgics," and all the arguments in prose to the whole translation;
which, perhaps, has caused a report, that the two first poems are
not mine.[88] If it had been true, that I had taken their verses for
my own, I might have gloried in their aid, and, like Terence, have
fathered the opinion that Scipio and Lælius joined with me. But the
same style being continued through the whole, and the same laws of
versification observed, are proofs sufficient, that this is one man's
work: and your lordship is too well acquainted with my manner, to doubt
that any part of it is another's.

That your lordship may see I was in earnest when I promised to hasten
to an end, I will not give the reasons why I writ not always in the
proper terms of navigation, land-service, or in the cant of any
profession. I will only say, that Virgil has avoided those proprieties,
because he writ not to mariners, soldiers, astronomers, gardeners,
peasants, &c. but to all in general, and in particular to men and
ladies of the first quality, who have been better bred than to be too
nicely knowing in the terms. In such cases, it is enough for a poet to
write so plainly, that he may be understood by his readers; to avoid
impropriety, and not affect to be thought learned in all things.

I have omitted the four preliminary lines of the First Æneïd, because
I think them inferior to any four others in the whole poem, and
consequently believe they are not Virgil's.[89] There is too great
a gap betwixt the adjective _vicina_ in the second line, and the
substantive _arva_ in the latter end of the third, which keeps his
meaning in obscurity too long, and is contrary to the clearness of his
style.

  _Ut quamvis avido_

is too ambitious an ornament to be his; and

  _Gratum opus agricolis_,

are all words unnecessary, and independent of what he had said before.

  ------_Horrentia Martis
  Arma_------

is worse than any of the rest. _Horrentia_ is such a flat epithet, as
Tully would have given us in his verses. It is a mere filler, to stop
a vacancy in the hexameter, and connect the preface to the work of
Virgil. Our author seems to sound a charge, and begins like the clangor
of a trumpet:

  _Arma, virumque cano, Trojæ qui primus ab oris_ ...

scarce a word without an _r_, and the vowels, for the greater part,
sonorous. The prefacer began with _Ille ego_, which he was constrained
to patch up in the fourth line with _at nunc_, to make the sense
cohere; and, if both those words are not notorious botches, I am much
deceived, though the French translator thinks otherwise. For my own
part, I am rather of the opinion, that they were added by Tucca and
Varius, than retrenched.

I know it may be answered, by such as think Virgil the author of the
four lines, that he asserts his title to the Æneïs in the beginning
of this work, as he did to the two former in the last lines of the
Fourth Georgic. I will not reply otherwise to this, than by desiring
them to compare these four lines with the four others, which we know
are his, because no poet but he alone could write them. If they cannot
distinguish creeping from flying, let them lay down Virgil, and take
up Ovid, _de Ponto_, in his stead. My master needed not the assistance
of that preliminary poet to prove his claim. His own majestic mien
discovers him to be the king, amidst a thousand courtiers. It was a
superfluous office; and, therefore, I would not set those verses in the
front of Virgil, but have rejected them[90] to my own preface.

  I, who before, with shepherds in the groves,
  Sung, to my oaten pipe, their rural loves,
  And, issuing thence, compelled the neighbouring field
  A plenteous crop of rising corn to yield,
  Manured the glebe, and stocked the fruitful plain,
  (A poem grateful to the greedy swain,) &c.

If there be not a tolerable line in all these six, the prefacer gave
me no occasion to write better. This is a just apology in this place;
but I have done great wrong to Virgil in the whole translation: want
of time, the inferiority of our language, the inconvenience of rhyme,
and all the other excuses I have made, may alleviate my fault, but
cannot justify the boldness of my undertaking. What avails it me to
acknowledge freely, that I have not been able to do him right in any
line? for even my own confession makes against me; and it will always
be returned upon me, "Why then did you attempt it?" To which no other
answer can be made, than that I have done him less injury than any of
his former libellers.

What they called his picture, had been drawn at length, so many times,
by the daubers of almost all nations, and still so unlike him, that I
snatched up the pencil with disdain; being satisfied before-hand, that
I could make some small resemblance of him, though I must be content
with a worse likeness. A Sixth Pastoral, a Pharmaceutria, a single
Orpheus, and some other features, have been exactly taken: but those
holiday-authors writ for pleasure; and only showed us what they could
have done, if they would have taken pains to perform the whole.

Be pleased, my lord, to accept, with your wonted goodness, this
unworthy present which I make you. I have taken off one trouble from
you, of defending it, by acknowledging its imperfections: and, though
some part of them are covered in the verse, (as Erichthonius rode
always in a chariot, to hide his lameness,) such of them as cannot be
concealed, you will please to connive at, though, in the strictness of
your judgment, you cannot pardon. If Homer was allowed to nod sometimes
in so long a work, it will be no wonder if I often fall asleep. You
took my "Aureng-Zebe"[91] into your protection, with all his faults:
and I hope here cannot be so many, because I translate an author who
gives me such examples of correctness. What my jury may be, I know
not; but it is good for a criminal to plead before a favourable judge:
if I had said partial, would your lordship have forgiven me? or will
you give me leave to acquaint the world, that I have many times been
obliged to your bounty since the Revolution? Though I never was reduced
to beg a charity, nor ever had the impudence to ask one, either of
your lordship, or your noble kinsman the Earl of Dorset,[92] much less
of any other; yet, when I least expected it, you have both remembered
me: so inherent it is in your family not to forget an old servant. It
looks rather like ingratitude on my part, that, where I have been so
often obliged, I have appeared so seldom to return my thanks, and where
I was also so sure of being well received. Somewhat of laziness was in
the case, and somewhat too of modesty, but nothing of disrespect or of
unthankfulness. I will not say that your lordship has encouraged me to
this presumption, lest, if my labours meet with no success in public,
I may expose your judgment to be censured. As for my own enemies, I
shall never think them worth an answer; and, if your lordship has any,
they will not dare to arraign you for want of knowledge in this art,
till they can produce somewhat better of their own, than your "Essay
on Poetry." It was on this consideration, that I have drawn out my
preface to so great a length. Had I not addressed to a poet and a
critic of the first magnitude, I had myself been taxed for want of
judgment, and shamed my patron for want of understanding. But neither
will you, my lord, so soon be tired as any other, because the discourse
is on your art; neither will the learned reader think it tedious,
because it is[93]_ad Clerum_. At least, when he begins to be weary,
the church-doors are open. That I may pursue the allegory with a short
prayer after a long sermon--

May you live happily and long, for the service of your country, the
encouragement of good letters, and the ornament of poetry; which
cannot be wished more earnestly by any man, than by

  Your Lordship's
    Most humble,
      Most obliged, and
        Most obedient servant,
            JOHN DRYDEN.


FOOTNOTES:

[28] Mulgrave's early and intimate connection with our author
has been often noticed in the course of this edition. In the reign of
William III. he remained in a sort of disgrace, from his attachment
to the exiled king: yet, in 1694, he was created Marquis of Normanby:
in the reign of the queen, he rose still higher; and it is said, that
the dignities, offices, and influence, which he then enjoyed, were the
reward of the ambitious love which he had dared to entertain for that
princess, when she was only the Lady Anne, second daughter to the Duke
of York.--See _Dryden's Life_; also _Dedication to Aureng-Zebe_, Vol.
V. p. 174.

[29] The early editions, by an absurd and continued blunder,
read Aristotle. Ariosto, and indeed all the heroic Italian poets, Tasso
excepted, have chequered their romantic fictions with lighter stories,
such as those of Jocondo and of Adonio, in the "Orlando Furioso."
But neither Ariosto, nor his predecessors Boiardo and Pulci, ever
entertained the idea of writing a regular epic poem after the ancient
rules. On the contrary, they often drop the mask in the middle of the
romantic wonders which they relate; and plainly shew, how very far
they are from considering the narrative as serious. It was, therefore,
consistent with their plan, to admit such light and frivolous
narratives, as might relieve the general gravity of their tale, which
resembled an epic poem as little as a melo-drama does a tragedy.

[30] I quote, from Mr Malone, Mr Harte's vindication of
Statius; premising, however, that it is far from amounting to an
exculpation of that boisterous author, whose works have fallen into
oblivion even among scholars, in due proportion to the ripening of
poetical taste.

"Mr Dryden, in his excellent Preface to the Æneid, takes occasion
to quarrel with Statius, and calls the present book (the Sixth) 'an
ill-timed and injudicious episode.' I wonder so severe a remark could
pass from that gentleman, who was an admirer of our author, even to
superstition. I own I can scarce forgive myself to contradict so
great a poet, and so good a critic: _talium enim virorum ut admiratio
maxima, ita censura difficilis_. However, the present case may admit
of very alleviating circumstances. It may be replied, in general, that
the design of this book was to give a respite to the main action,
introducing a mournful, but pleasing variation, from terror to pity.
It is also highly probable, that Statius had an eye to the funeral
obsequies of Polydore and Anchises, mentioned in the third and fifth
books of Virgil. We may also look upon them as a prelude, opening
the mind by degrees to receive the miseries and horror of a future
war. This is intimated in some measure by the derivation of the word
_Archemorus_."--_Note on Mr Walter Harte's Translation of the Sixth
Book of the Thebaid._

Notwithstanding what Mr Harte has stated, our author seldom mentions
Statius, without reprobating his turgid and bombast stile.

[31] Dryden, as was excellently observed by Sir Samuel Garth,
in his "Funeral Eulogy," always thought that species of composition
most excellent upon which his labour had been more immediately
employed. In the "Essay upon Dramatic Poesy," he had preferred the
tragedy to the epic poem, and here he has reversed their station and
rank. I think the principal distinction is noticed below. Tragedy is
addressed, as it were, to the eye; and the whole scene to be enjoyed,
even in perusal, must be supposed present to the observation. But
epic poetry is, by its nature, narrative; and, therefore, while it is
capable of the beauties of more extended description, and more copious
morality, it is excluded from that immediate and energetic appeal to
the senses manifested in the drama.

[32] The cant of supposing, that the Iliad contained an
obvious and intentional moral, was at this time so established
among the critics, that even Dryden durst not shake himself free of
it. In all probability, the ancient blind bard only thought of so
arranging his splendid tale of Troy divine, that it should arrest the
attention of his hearers. Doubtless, an admirable moral may be often
extracted from his poem; because it contains an accurate picture of
human nature, which can never be truly presented, without conveying
a lesson of instruction. But it may shrewdly be suspected, that the
moral was as little intended by the author, as it would have been the
object of a historian, whose work is equally pregnant with morality,
though a detail of facts be only intended. We may be pretty sure, that
Homer meant his Achilles, the favourite of the gods, as a character
approaching perfection; and if he is cruel, proud, disobedient, and
vengeful, I am afraid it was only because these attributes, in a savage
state, are deemed as little derogatory from the character of a hero,
as dissipation and gallantry are blemishes in that of a modern fine
gentleman.

[33] The opinion of Horace is a confirmation of what is
stated above. None of the ancients ventured to impute the rudeness of
Homer's characters to the barbarity of the poet's age. The faults which
they could not shut their eyes against, must, they thought, have been
equally apparent to the bard himself; although, in all probability, he
meant, that these very attributes in his heroes should be considered as
virtues.

[34] "_Bibliopola Tryphon_," a character twice mentioned by
Martial, Epig. Lib. IV. 72. XIII. 3. Dryden probably means Tonson.

[35] A Gallicism for the toilette, at which the ladies of
Dryden's time, in imitation of their neighbours of France, were wont to
receive visits, and hear recitations and readings.

[36] Dryden, in the "Essay on Dramatic Poesy," maintains the
cause of Shakespeare and Jonson against the French dramatists.

[37] It appeared first in 1682, and drew the public attention
by much sound criticism, expressed in pointed language; although
the verse is so untunable and rugged, as to sound very disagreeably
to modern ears. Dryden is mentioned with only a qualified degree of
respect, and that paid solely to his satirical powers:

  The laureat here may justly claim our praise,
  Crowned by Mac-Flecnoe with immortal bays;
  Yet once his Pegasus has borne dead weight,
  Rid by some lumpish minister of state.

The last couplet alludes to the "Hind and Panther."

[38] Our author mentions elsewhere, "The Essay of Poetry,
which I publicly valued before I knew the author of it." Vol. XII.
p. 275. Although his lordship's experiment proved thus successful, I
may be permitted to hint, that most noble authors may find it rather
hazardous.

[39] Tasso's "Jerusalem Delivered," seems to have been the
first heroic poem attempted upon a classical model, after the revival
of literature.

[40] Pulci wrote the "Movagante Maggiore," Boiardo the
"Orlando Innamorato," and Ariosto the well-known continuation of that
poem, called the "Orlando Furioso." The first two poems, like the
"Amadigi," and a number of others in the same taste, are rather to be
considered as an improvement upon the old metrical romances, than as
attempts at epic poetry. At the same time, these authors do not always
expect their readers to receive with gravity, the marvels which they
narrate; but introduce at every turn some ludicrous image, to shew how
little they are themselves serious. Although Ariosto is immeasurably
distinguished by brilliancy of imagination, and beauty of expression,
from the rest of those romancers, yet even his delightful work may
be more properly termed a romance of chivalry than an epic poem; a
distinction which the Tuscan bard can hardly regret, since it has
afforded, throughout Europe, more general delight than all the epics in
the world, if we except those of Homer and Virgil.

[41] "La Pucelle D'Orleans." It will hardly, I hope, be
expected, that an editor of Dryden should be deeply read in the French
epopee, which of all styles of poetry is the most uniformly stiff and
freezing.

[42] That Spenser's twelve champions, each of whom was to
atchieve a distinct and separate adventure, could ever have been so
brought together, as to entitle the "Fairy Queen" to be called a
regular epic, may be justly doubted, I confess I think it probable,
that the difficulty of concluding his work, was one great cause of its
being left unfinished.

Dryden's objection to the "Paradise Lost," is founded on the unhappy
termination, which is contrary to the rules of the epopee. Even so it
has been disputed, whether a tragedy, which ends happily, is properly
and regularly entitled to the name. Yet the story is more completely
winded up in the "Paradise Lost," than in the "Iliad," where Troy is
left standing, after all the battles which are fought about it. Our
reverence for the ancients, in this and many other instances, has been
driven to superstitious bigotry.

[43] In the following comparison, our author assumes, that the
"Iliad" was actually written with a view to its moral tendency. But
considering the matter fairly, and without prejudice, there is as much
reason for supposing, that Shakespeare had a great public purpose to
accomplish in every one of his plays; which we know were only written
to fill the Bull or the Fortune theatres, as the songs of Homer were
recited, minstrel-like, for the supply of his daily wants. But both
these gifted men had an intuitive knowledge of human nature, which
cannot be justly described, without an evident, though undesigned,
moral pressing itself on the hearers. Virgil's poem, however, had
certainly a political, if not a moral purpose; for, while it gratified
the nobles of the court of Augustus, by deducing their descent from the
followers of Æneas, it tamed their republican spirit, by describing the
monarchy of the emperor, not as an usurpation, but a hereditary, though
interrupted succession, from the wandering Prince of Troy.

[44] This is one of our author's unseemly and far too frequent
sneers at the clerical order, for which he is severely reprehended by
Milbourne.

[45] Here again Milbourne is very clamorous for authority, and
exclaims, that it is one of the fundamental laws of Parnassus to write
true history. Dryden probably rested upon the scandalous tale, that
Cæsar intrigued with Servilia, the mother of Brutus; though it seems
more likely, that he applied to his assassin the endearing epithet of
_my son_, merely as a term of affectionate friendship.

[46] The sense which our author has put on this line, has
been warmly disputed; many commentators contending, that the elder
Cato, called the Censor, and not Cato of Utica, is the person therein
honoured. Pope held the same opinion with our poet, and abandoned it;
and Spence, quoted by Mr Malone, thus expresses himself:--"Virgil
represents the blessed in Elysium, and Cato giving laws to them. This
agrees best with the character of Cato the Censor. See Plutarch's
account of the Elder Cato; of his strict judgments and laws; of
the statue set up to his honour in the temple of Salus, and of the
inscription under it, in his Life of that great lawgiver. Seneca
speaks as highly of him in that capacity, as of Scipio in the military
way: _M. Porcius Censorius, quem tam rei publicæ profuit nasci, quam
Scipionem; alter enim cum hostibus nostris bellum, alter cum moribus
gessit_. Epist. lxxxvii. If Cato Uticensis could have been placed at
all in Elysium by Virgil, (who says, that such as kill themselves are
in another part of Hades,) he would, at least, be a very improper
person to be set by him in so eminent a situation there."

[47] This is disputed by the learned Heyne. "De _consilio_ quod poeta
in Æneide conscribenda sequutus sit, et de _fine_, quem propositum
habuerit, multa varii comminiscuntur. Nihil quidem magis alienum esse
potest ab epico carmine quam _allegoria_; jugulat enim totam ejus vim,
rerum et hominum dignitatem attenuat, gratum animi errorem excutit,
et æstum inter legendum refrigerat, voluptatemque omnem intercipit.
Certatim tamen viri docti argutiis suis Æneæ personam nobis eripere,
et Augustum submittere allaborarunt. Etiam ex parata nova in Latio
sede miseros Trojanos exturbarunt; adumbratum esse a poeta novum tum
Romæ constitutum unius principatum. Simili acumine alii arcana, nescio
quæ, dominationis Augusteæ consilia, in Æneide condenda deprehendere
sibi visi sunt. Ita SPENCIUS, elegantis ingenii vir, [Polymetis, Dial.
iii. p. 17. sqq.] πολιτικὸν epos esse Æneidem sibi persuasum habebat;
neque aliud quicquam poetam spectasse, quam ut animis libertatis ereptæ
desiderio ægris fomenta admoveret, et novum principem approbaret.
Nihil tamen Æneæ personam, fortunam, facta, et fata habere videas,
quod ei consilio respondeat; nullus in Æneide populus est liber, qui
dominum accipiat; nulla regni seu imperii, monarchiam vocamus, bona
videas exposita aut commendata; verbo nihil occurrit, quo libertatis
amore contacti animi adduci aut allici possint, ut a bono principe
malint tuto regnari quam cum libertatis vano nomine paucorum potentium
dominatione vexari. In Juliæ gentis honorem, quæ ab Iulo Æneæ filio
originem ducere videri volebat, nonnulla passim suaviter memorari, ad
Augusti laudes ingeniose alia inseri, ipsa carminis lectione manifestum
sit, et a veteribus quoque Grammaticis jam monitum est locis pluribus;
sed, quantam vim ea res ad dominationem Augusti commendandam habere
potuerit, mihi non satis constare lubenter fateor. Neque, si nova
Æneæ sedes in Latio divinis humanisque juribus vallata fuerit, quale
inde propugnaculum novo Augusti regno partum sit, intelligo; ut adeo,
si demonstrari hoc possit, poetæ consilium illud in Æneide condenda
propositum fuisse, parum feliciter eum in eo perficiendo et exsequendo
versatum videri dicerem.

"In eandem tamen opinionem jam ante Spencium inciderat vir doctus
inter Francogallos, [L'Abbé Vatry,] qui imprimis similitudinem inter
Æneæ et Augusti personam et fortunam diserte persequitur. Ingeniose
eum ludere non neges; et convenit ei cum multis aliis doctis viris,
qui opinantur, Augustum sub Æneæ persona esse adumbratum; eo referunt
multa alia. Videas nonnullos tam egregie sibi placere in hoc invento,
ut undique conquirant et venentur ea, quæ ad Augustum accommodari
possint. Sic oris dignitas (lib. i. 589, _Os humerosque deos_.) cum
assentatione in Augustum memorata est. Ignoscenda hæc putem alicui ex
media assentatorum turba, qui Æneide lecta unam vel alteram Æneæ laudem
ad Augustum traheret, ut Principi palparet. Sed, ut MARO tam dissimiles
personas, fortunas, virtutes et facta ac res gestas, inter se comparare
voluerit, mihi quidem, si ejus judicium et elegantiam recte teneo,
parum probabile videtur. Sapientior erat poeta, et rei poeticæ
intelligentior, quam ut talem cogitationem in animum admitteret. Nam
præterquam quod Æneæ characterem non invenit, sed ab aliis jam traditum
accepit, circumspiciendæ erant a poeta virtutes Æneæ ejusmodi, quæ in
epico argumento vim et splendorem haberent, et factorum, quæ enarranda
erant, causas idoneas suppeditarent. Quod si ille studium suum ponere
voluisset maxime in hoc, et Æneas Augusto assimularetur, quam multa et
quam parum consentanea epicæ narrationi, argumento, operis characteri,
temporum rationi, illaturus in carmen suum fuisset!

"Eadem fere via carmen πολιτικὸν conditum a poeta visum jam olim erat
R. Patri le Bossu, ut Romanos partim ad amplectendum et probandum
præsentem rerum statum adducere, partim Augustum ad moderationem ac
clementiam adhortari, et a dominationis libidine et impotentia revocare
voluerit. Sed nec huic consilio ulla ex parte respondet Æneidis sive
argumentum sive tractatio: profugus ex urbe incensa Æneas novam sedem
quærit, armis vim illatam propulsat, et sic porro; quid tandem his
inest, quod ad imperandi artes ac virtutes spectet? Fabulæ tamen
Virgilianæ universe inesse, et in singulis carminis partibus aut locis
ac versibus occurrere talia, quæ principibus pro salubribus præceptis
commendari possint, nemo neget; quin potius inter utilitates, quæ
poetarum carminibus debentur, præcipue hoc commemorandum est. Verum
non propterea dici potest ac debet, in condendo carmine et in fabula
deligenda et ordinanda tale præceptum propositum poetæ fuisse, cujus
explicandi caussa narrationem institueret. Narrare ille voluit ac
debuit rem magnam et arduam et mirabilem. Quod narratio illa, et
delectatio quæ inde accipitur, cum utilitate ad omnes hominum ordines,
inprimisque ad principum animos conjuncta est, hoc epicæ narrationi
per se consentaneum est; ipsa enim rei natura ita fert, ut magnorum
virorum facta magna et præclara sine summo ad hominum animos, mores
ac virtutem, fructu exponi et narrari nequeant, multo magis si cum
sententiarum splendore et orationis ornatu instituta sit narratio."
VIRG. a C. G. Heyne. Disquisit. i. de Carm. Epico.

[48] I suspect our author spoke from recollection of some of
his own satirical strokes. Even in the "Hind and Panther," Sunderland,
a convert to the religion defended by the poet, and Petre, the king's
own chaplain and bosom counsellor, do not escape.

[49] The prophecy of Juno, in the Third Ode of the Third Book.

[50] Dryden had forgot, what he must certainly have known,
that the fiction of Achilles being invulnerable, bears date long
posterior to the days of Homer. In the Iliad he is actually wounded.

[51] The same compound is used in "Absalom and Achitophel," as
has been noticed by Mr Malone:

  Gods they had tried of every shape and size,
  That godsmiths could produce, or priests devise.

[52] The Scots, about Dryden's time, had many superstitions
concerning individuals, whom they supposed to be shot-proof, by virtue
of a satanic charm. The famous Viscount of Dundee was supposed to
be invulnerable to bullets of lead; and when Archbishop Sharpe was
murdered, the assassins having missed him, although very near when they
first discharged their pieces, imputed the scorched marks left by the
powder on his skin to contusions received from their balls. But the
word _warlock_, or _warlough_, means a male sorcerer in general; and
has not, as Dryden seems to suppose, any reference to this particular
charm. It seems rather to be derived from _wird_ and _laere_, a
compound which would imply "skilled in futurity."

[53] The vulgar, to use Gay's account, believe,

  How if on Swithin's feast the welkin lowers,
  And every pent-house streams with hasty showers;
  Twice twenty days shall clouds their fleeces drain,
  And wash the pavements with incessant rain.

[54] The son of Sir Walter Moyle, an accomplished scholar,
whom Dryden elsewhere mentions with esteem. He died in 1621.

[55] It is agreeable to see, from this and other passages,
that, notwithstanding an intervening rupture, our author, at the latter
end of his life, was on good terms with his brother-in-law, to whom he
was so much indebted at the commencement of his poetical career.

[56] Author of the "True Intellectual System of the Universe,"
folio, 1678.

[57] Milbourne is very severe on our author for crediting
this story, of Virgil having condemned the Æneïd to the flames. But
it is sanctioned by the Elder Pliny. "_D. Augustus carmina Virgilii
cremari contra testamenti ejus verecundiam, vetuit; majusque ita vati
testimonium contigit, quam si ipse sua probasset._"--HIST. NAT. vii.
30.

[58] I am afraid, this passage, given as a just description of
love, serves to confirm what is elsewhere stated, that Dryden's ideas
of the female sex and of the passion were very gross and malicious.

[59] "_Legatus est vir bonus, peregrè missus ad mentiendum
reipublicæ causa_;" a sentence which Sir Henry wrote in the _Album_
of Christopher Flecamore, as he passed through Germany, when he went
as ambassador to Venice. These words, says his biographer, Isaac
Walton, "he could have been content should have been thus Englished:
_An ambassador is an honest man, sent to_ lie _abroad for the good
of his country_: but the word _mentiendum_ not admitting of a double
meaning, like _lie_, (which at that time signified to _sojourn_, as
well as to utter criminal falshood,) this pleasantry brought my Lord
Ambassador into some trouble; Jasper Scioppius, a Romanist, about
eight years afterwards, asserting in one of his works, that this was
an acknowledged principle of the religion professed by King James, and
those whom he employed as his representatives in foreign countries."
See the Life of Sir Henry Wotton, p. 38. edit. 1670.--MALONE, p. 486.
Note.

[60] See the "Translation of Dido's Epistle to Æneas," Vol.
xii. p. 34.

[61]: The emperor Augustus divorced Scribonia, his second wife,
in order to make room for his marriage with Livia. But the argument of
our author from the Æneïd seems far-fetched.

[62] This original and expressive word for a poet was long
retained in Scotland.--See Dunbar's Lament for the Death of the Makyrs.

[63] Mr Malone reads--_so strong_; but _strange_ here seems to
signify _alarming_, or _startling_.

[64] Dacier.

[65] I fear there is something in this objection. Virgil, who
lived in a peaceful court, does not draw his battles with the animation
and reality of Homer, who, if he was not himself a warrior, was the
poet of a rude and warlike age.

[66] Unquestionably the description, in the passage quoted,
and the simile, aid each other with great mutual effect.

[67] Commentators on the Scripture, mentioned by our author in
the "Religio Laici," where, speaking of Dickenson's translation of Pere
Simon's "Critical History of the Old Testament," he calls it

  A treasure, which, if country curates buy,
  They Junius and Tremellius may defy.--Vol. X. p. 44.

[68] This display of learning seems a little out of place.
Undoubtedly it was important, if the accusation had been, that Virgil
had misplaced his seasons. But, as to the mere length of time employed
in his epic, there seems no better reason why it should be a year than
a month, or two years than one, so long as the interest is effectually
maintained.

[69] Our author seems always to have had a view to form
the machinery of an epic poem, upon the principles of the Platonic
philosophy, which he proposed to adapt to the guardian angels of
kingdoms, mentioned by the prophet Daniel. Vol. xii. p. 25.

[70] These lines are inaccurately quoted, for

  ----_Non me tua fervida terrent
  Dicta, ferox_, &c.

  Æneid xii. l. 895.

[71] Misquoted again; for

  ----_non me tua fervida terrent
  Dicta, ferox_.

I think the passage may easily be interpreted without disparagement of
Æneas's valour, even without adopting Dryden's construction. Turnus, a
brave and proud man, reduced to the humiliating situation of confessing
his fears, naturally imputes them to the more honourable cause, a
dread, namely, of supernatural interference. To confess his terror to
arise from the force of his mortal adversary, would have been degrading
to his character.

[72] It is singular, that, under this conviction, Dryden
should have complied with the custom of his age, in striking out the
vowel before the end of such words as _winged_.

[73] This celebrated couplet occurs in Sir John Denham's
"Cooper's Hill," a poem which was praised beyond its merit by the
author's contemporaries. After allowing that the lines are smooth and
sonorous, which indeed were infrequent qualities of the versification
of the period, I fear much of their merit lies in the skilful
antithesis of the attributes of the river.

[74] Louis XIV.; whom Dryden probably in his heart compared
with disadvantage to the needy Charles, who loved literary merit
without rewarding it; the saturnine James, who rewarded without loving
it; and the phlegmatic William, who did neither the one nor the other.

[75] St John, in his conversation with Astolfo, on the
latter's arrival in the Moon.

[76] This is not expressed with sufficient precision.
Undoubtedly one possessing those true poetic qualities, which consist
in the thought and not in the mere arrangement of expression, will
shine most in the easiest structure of versification. But there is a
very inferior, yet not altogether contemptible kind of poet, whose
merit consists more in melody of versification, and neatness or even
felicity of expression, than in his powers of conception. Such bards
will do well to avail themselves of the melody of rhyme.

[77] A learned physician of Dryden's time.

[78] There can be, I think, little doubt, that in both these
passages the poet has detected the true and poetical sense of the
author, which has escaped the mere commentator.

[79] All of whom had made slight and partial attempts as
translators from Virgil.

[80] This comparison our author has detailed in his preface to
Fresnoy's "Art of Painting."

"I am now come, though with the omission of many likenesses, to the
third part of Painting, which is called cromatic, or colouring.
Expression, and all that belongs to words, is that in a poem which
colouring is in a picture. The colours well chosen in their proper
places, together with the lights and shadows which belong to them,
lighten the design, and make it pleasing to the eye. The words, the
expressions, the tropes and figures, the versification, and all the
other elegancies of sound, as cadences, turns of words upon the
thought, and many other things which are all parts of expression,
perform exactly the same office, both in dramatic and epic poetry. Our
author calls colouring--_lena sororis_; in plain English, the bawd of
her sister, the design or drawing: she clothes, she dresses her up, she
paints her, she makes her appear more lovely than naturally she is, she
procures for the design, and makes lovers for her; for the design of
itself is only so many naked lines. Thus in poetry, the expression is
that which charms the reader, and beautifies the design, which is only
the outlines of the fables."

[81] This river, which flows past Madrid, is distinguished by
the splendour of its bridge, and the scantiness of its waters.

[82] Now more commonly called an Alexandrine. Pope had perhaps
this passage in his memory, when he composed the famous triplet
descriptive of Dryden's versification:

  Waller was smooth; but Dryden taught to join
  The varying verse, the full resounding line,
  The long majestic march, and energy divine.

[83] He alludes to Cowley, who was forced abroad by the ill
fate of the royal party in the civil wars.

[84] Our author has, however, availed himself of this licence
in his earlier poetry.

[85] The confusion occasioned by the rules of the mint,
then recently adopted, created great inconvenience and distress to
individuals. It is often mentioned in the correspondence between Tonson
and Dryden.

[86] Nevertheless, our author, long before undertaking the
translation of Virgil, had given a noble paraphrase of these lines in
the Hind's address to the Panther:

  This mean retreat did mighty Pan contain;}
  Be emulous of him, and pomp disdain,     }
  And dare not to debase your soul to gain.}

  _Vol. X. p. 184._

[87] Richard, fourth earl of Lauderdale, nephew of that
respectable minister the Duke of Lauderdale. "He had a fine genius for
poetry," says Sir Robert Douglas, in his Peerage of Scotland; "witness
his elegant translation of Virgil."

[88] Dr Knightly Chetwood and Mr Addison. The former wrote the
"Life of Virgil," and the "Preface to the Pastorals;" the latter, the
"Essay on the Georgics." See Introductory Notes on these Pieces.

[89]

  _Ille ego, qui quondam gracili modulatus avena
  Carmen, et, egressus silvis, vicina coegi
  Ut quamvis avido parerent arva colono,
  Gratum opus agricolis; at nunc horrentia Martis_...

The characteristic modesty of our author, as well as the rugged and
turgid structure of these lines, have authorised modern critics to
conclude, that neither the sense nor expression of these four lines
resembles the genuine productions of Virgil.

[90] A Latinism for "throwing back."

[91] See Vol. V. p. 174.

[92] Their mothers were half sisters, being both daughters of
Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex.

[93] _Concio ad Clerum_, a sermon preached before a learned
body.




ÆNEÏS,




BOOK I.

ARGUMENT.

 _The Trojans, after a seven years' voyage, set sail for Italy, but are
 overtaken by a dreadful storm, which Æolus raises at Juno's request.
 The tempest sinks one, and scatters the rest. Neptune drives off the
 Winds, and calms the sea. Æneas, with his own ship, and six more,
 arrives safe at an African port. Venus complains to Jupiter of her
 son's misfortunes. Jupiter comforts her, and sends Mercury to procure
 him a kind reception among the Carthaginians. Æneas, going out to
 discover the country, meets his mother, in the shape of a huntress,
 who conveys him in a cloud to Carthage, where he sees his friends whom
 he thought lost, and receives a kind entertainment from the queen.
 Dido, by a device of Venus, begins to have a passion for him, and,
 after some discourse with him, desires the history of his adventures
 since the siege of Troy, which is the subject of the two following
 Books._

  Arms, and the man I sing, who, forced by Fate,
  And haughty Juno's unrelenting hate,
  Expelled and exiled, left the Trojan shore.
  Long labours, both by sea and land, he bore,
  And in the doubtful war, before he won
  The Latian realm, and built the destined town;
  His banished gods restored to rites divine,
  And settled sure succession in his line,
  From whence the race of Alban fathers come,
  And the long glories of majestic Rome.
    O Muse! the causes and the crimes relate;
  What goddess was provoked, and whence her hate;
  For what offence the queen of heaven began
  To persecute so brave, so just a man;
  Involved his anxious life in endless cares,
  Exposed to wants, and hurried into wars!
  Can heavenly minds such high resentment show,
  Or exercise their spite in human woe?
    Against the Tyber's mouth, but far away,
  An ancient town was seated on the sea,
  A Tyrian colony; the people made
  Stout for the war, and studious of their trade:
  Carthage the name; beloved by Juno more
  Than her own Argos, or the Samian shore.
  Here stood her chariot; here, if heaven were kind,
  The seat of awful empire she designed.
  Yet she had heard an ancient rumour fly,
  (Long cited by the people of the sky,)
  That times to come should see the Trojan race
  Her Carthage ruin, and her towers deface;
  Nor thus confined, the yoke of sovereign sway
  Should on the necks of all the nations lay.
  She pondered this, and feared it was in fate;               }
  Nor could forget the war she waged of late,                 }
  For conquering Greece against the Trojan state.             }
  Besides, long causes working in her mind,
  And secret seeds of envy, lay behind:
  Deep graven in her heart, the doom remained
  Of partial Paris, and her form disdained;
  The grace bestowed on ravished Ganymed,
  Electra's glories, and her injured bed.
  Each was a cause alone; and all combined
  To kindle vengeance in her haughty mind.
  For this, far distant from the Latian coast,
  She drove the remnants of the Trojan host:
  And seven long years the unhappy wandering train
  Were tossed by storms, and scattered through the main.
  Such time, such toil, required the Roman name,
  Such length of labour for so vast a frame.
    Now scarce the Trojan fleet, with sails and oars,
  Had left behind the fair Sicilian shores,
  Entering with cheerful shouts the watery reign,
  And ploughing frothy furrows in the main;
  When, labouring still with endless discontent,
  The queen of heaven did thus her fury vent:
    "Then am I vanquished? must I yield?" said she:
  "And must the Trojans reign in Italy?
  So Fate will have it; and Jove adds his force;
  Nor can my power divert their happy course.
  Could angry Pallas, with revengeful spleen,
  The Grecian navy burn, and drown the men?
  She, for the fault of one offending foe,
  The bolts of Jove himself presumed to throw:
  With whirlwinds from beneath she tossed the ship,
  And bare exposed the bosom of the deep:
  Then, as an eagle gripes the trembling game,
  The wretch, yet hissing with her father's flame,
  She strongly seized, and with a burning wound
  Transfixed, and, naked, on a rock she bound.
  But I, who walk in awful state above,
  The majesty of heaven, the sister wife of Jove,
  For length of years my fruitless force employ
  Against the thin remains of ruined Troy!
  What nations now to Juno's power will pray,
  Or offerings on my slighted altars lay?"
    Thus raged the goddess; and, with fury fraught,
  The restless regions of the storms she sought,
  Where, in a spacious cave of living stone,
  The tyrant Æolus, from his airy throne,
  With power imperial curbs the struggling winds,
  And sounding tempests in dark prisons binds.
  This way, and that, the impatient captives tend,
  And, pressing for release, the mountains rend.
  High in his hall the undaunted monarch stands,
  And shakes his sceptre, and their rage commands;
  Which did he not, their unresisted sway
  Would sweep the world before them in their way;
  Earth, air, and seas, through empty space would roll,
  And heaven would fly before the driving soul.
  In fear of this, the Father of the Gods                     }
  Confined their fury to those dark abodes,                   }
  And locked them safe within, oppressed with mountain loads; }
  Imposed a king, with arbitrary sway,
  To loose their fetters, or their force allay;
  To whom the suppliant queen her prayers addressed,
  And thus the tenor of her suit expressed:--
  "O Æolus! for to thee the king of heaven
  The power of tempests and of winds has given;
  Thy force alone their fury can restrain,
  And smooth the waves, or swell the troubled main--
  A race of wandering slaves, abhorred by me,
  With prosperous passage cut the Tuscan sea:
  To fruitful Italy their course they steer,
  And, for their vanquished gods, design new temples there.
  Raise all thy winds; with night involve the skies;
  Sink or disperse my fatal enemies.
  Twice seven, the charming daughters of the main,
  Around my person wait, and bear my train:
  Succeed my wish, and second my design,                      }
  The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine,                      }
  And make thee father of a happy line."[94]                  }
    To this the god:--"'Tis yours, O queen! to will
  The work, which duty binds me to fulfill.
  These airy kingdoms, and this wide command,
  Are all the presents of your bounteous hand:
  Yours is my sovereign's grace; and, as your guest,
  I sit with gods at their celestial feast.
  Raise tempests at your pleasure, or subdue;
  Dispose of empire, which I hold from you."
    He said, and hurled against the mountain side
  His quivering spear, and all the god applied.
  The raging winds rush through the hollow wound,
  And dance aloft in air, and skim along the ground;
  Then, settling on the sea, the surges sweep,
   Raise liquid mountains, and disclose the deep.
  South, East, and West, with mixed confusion roar,
  And roll the foaming billows to the shore.
  The cables crack; the sailors' fearful cries                }
  Ascend; and sable night involves the skies;                 }
  And heaven itself is ravished from their eyes.              }
  Loud peals of thunder from the poles ensue;
  Then flashing fires the transient light renew;
  The face of things a frightful image bears;
  And present death in various forms appears.
  Struck with unusual fright, the Trojan chief,
  With lifted hands and eyes, invokes relief;
  And "Thrice and four times happy those," he cried,
  "That under Ilian walls, before their parents, died!
  Tydides, bravest of the Grecian train!                      }
  Why could not I by that strong arm be slain,                }
  And lie by noble Hector on the plain,                       }
  Or great Sarpedon, in those bloody fields,
  Where Simoïs rolls the bodies and the shields
  Of heroes, whose dismembered hands yet bear
  The dart aloft, and clench the pointed spear!"
    Thus while the pious prince his fate bewails,
  Fierce Boreas drove against his flying sails,
  And rent the sheets: the raging billows rise,
  And mount the tossing vessel to the skies:
  Nor can the shivering oars sustain the blow;
  The galley gives her side, and turns her prow;
  While those astern, descending down the steep,
  Through gaping waves behold the boiling deep.
  Three ships were hurried by the Southern blast,
  And on the secret shelves with fury cast.
  Those hidden rocks the Ausonian sailors knew:
  They called them Altars, when they rose in view,
  And showed their spacious backs above the flood.
  Three more fierce Eurus, in his angry mood,
  Dashed on the shallows of the moving sand,
  And in mid ocean left them moored a-land.
  Orontes' bark, that bore the Lycian crew,
  (A horrid sight!) even in the hero's view,
  From stem to stern by waves was overborne:
  The trembling pilot, from his rudder torn,
  Was headlong hurled: thrice round the ship was tossed,
  Then bulged at once, and in the deep was lost;
  And here and there above the waves were seen
  Arms, pictures, precious goods, and floating men.
  The stoutest vessel to the storm gave way,
  And sucked, through loosened planks, the rushing sea.
  Ilioneus was her chief: Aletes old,
  Achates faithful, Abas young and bold,
  Endured not less: their ships, with gaping seams,
  Admit the deluge of the briny streams.
    Mean time imperial Neptune heard the sound
  Of raging billows breaking on the ground.
  Displeased, and fearing for his watery reign,
  He reared his awful head above the main,
  Serene in majesty; then rolled his eyes
  Around the space of earth, and seas, and skies.
  He saw the Trojan fleet dispersed, distressed,
  By stormy winds and wintery heaven oppressed.
  Full well the god his sister's envy knew,
  And what her aims and what her arts pursue.
  He summoned Eurus and the Western blast,
  And first an angry glance on both he cast,
  Then thus rebuked--"Audacious winds! from whence
  This bold attempt, this rebel insolence?
  Is it for you to ravage seas and land,
  Un-authorized by my supreme command?
  To raise such mountains on the troubled main?               }
  Whom I--but first 'tis fit the billows to restrain;         }
  And then you shall be taught obedience to my reign.         }
  Hence! to your lord my royal mandate bear--
  The realms of ocean and the fields of air
  Are mine, not his.[95] By fatal lot to me
  The liquid empire fell, and trident of the sea.
  His power to hollow caverns is confined:
  There let him reign, the jailor of the wind,
  With hoarse commands his breathing subjects call,
  And boast and bluster in his empty hall."
  He spoke--and, while he spoke, he smoothed the sea,
  Dispelled the darkness, and restored the day.
  Cymothoë, Triton, and the sea-green train
  Of beauteous nymphs, the daughters of the main,
  Clear from the rocks the vessels with their hands:          }
  The god himself with ready trident stands,                  }
  And opes the deep, and spreads the moving sands;            }
  Then heaves them off the shoals.--Where'er he guides      }
  His finny coursers, and in triumph rides,                 }
  The waves unruffle, and the sea subsides.                 }
  As, when in tumults rise the ignoble crowd,
  Mad are their motions, and their tongues are loud;
  And stones and brands in rattling volleys fly,
  And all the rustic arms that fury can supply:
  If then some grave and pious man appear,
  They hush their noise, and lend a listening ear:
  He sooths with sober words their angry mood,
  And quenches their innate desire of blood:
  So, when the father of the flood appears,
  And o'er the seas his sovereign trident rears,
  Their fury falls: he skims the liquid plains,               }
  High on his chariot, and, with loosened reins,              }
  Majestic moves along, and awful peace maintains.            }
  The weary Trojans ply their shattered oars
  To nearest land, and make the Libyan shores.
  Within a long recess there lies a bay:
  An island shades it from the rolling sea,
  And forms a port secure for ships to ride:                  }
  Broke by the jutting land, on either side,                  }
  In double streams the briny waters glide,                   }
  Betwixt two rows of rocks: a sylvan scene
  Appears above, and groves for ever green:
  A grot is formed beneath, with mossy seats,
  To rest the Nereïds, and exclude the heats.
  Down through the crannies of the living walls,
  The crystal streams descend in murmuring falls.
  No halsers need to bind the vessels here,
  Nor bearded anchors; for no storms they fear.
  Seven ships within this happy harbour meet,
  The thin remainders of the scattered fleet.
  The Trojans, worn with toils, and spent with woes,
  Leap on the welcome land, and seek their wished repose.
    First, good Achates, with repeated strokes
  Of clashing flints, their hidden fire provokes:
  Short flame succeeds: a bed of withered leaves
  The dying sparkles in their fall receives:
  Caught into life, in fiery fumes they rise,
  And, fed with stronger food, invade the skies.
  The Trojans, dropping wet, or stand around
  The cheerful blaze, or lie along the ground.
  Some dry their corn, infected with the brine,
  Then grind with marbles, and prepare to dine.
  Æneas climbs the mountain's airy brow,
  And takes a prospect of the seas below,
  If Capys thence, or Antheus, he could spy,
  Or see the streamers of Caïcus fly.
  No vessels were in view: but, on the plain,
  Three beamy stags command a lordly train
  Of branching heads: the more ignoble throng
  Attend their stately steps, and slowly graze along.
  He stood; and, while secure they fed below,
  He took the quiver and the trusty bow
  Achates used to bear: the leaders first
  He laid along, and then the vulgar pierced:
  Nor ceased his arrows, till the shady plain
  Seven mighty bodies with their blood distain.
  For the seven ships he made an equal share,
  And to the port returned, triumphant from the war.
  The jars of generous wine (Acestes' gift,
  When his Trinacrian shores the navy left)
  He set abroach, and for the feast prepared,
  In equal portions with the venison shared.
  Thus, while he dealt it round, the pious chief,
  With cheerful words, allayed the common grief:--
  "Endure, and conquer! Jove will soon dispose,
  To future good, our past and present woes.
  With me, the rocks of Scylla you have tried;
  The inhuman Cyclops, and his den defied.
  What greater ills hereafter can you bear?
  Resume your courage, and dismiss your care.
  An hour will come, with pleasure to relate
  Your sorrows past, as benefits of Fate.
  Through various hazards and events, we move
  To Latium, and the realms foredoomed by Jove.
  Called to the seat (the promise of the skies)
  Where Trojan kingdoms once again may rise,
  Endure the hardships of your present state;
  Live, and reserve yourselves for better fate."
    These words he spoke, but spoke not from his heart;
  His outward smiles concealed his inward smart.
  The jolly crew, unmindful of the past,
  The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste.
  Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil;            }
  The limbs, yet trembling, in the cauldrons boil;            }
  Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil.                }
  Stretched on the grassy turf, at ease they dine,
  Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with wine.
  Their hunger thus appeased, their care attends
  The doubtful fortune of their absent friends:
  Alternate hopes and fears their minds possess,
  Whether to deem them dead, or in distress.
  Above the rest, Æneas mourns the fate
  Of brave Orontes, and the uncertain state
  Of Gyas, Lycus, and of Amycus.--
  The day, but not their sorrows, ended thus;
  When, from aloft, almighty Jove surveys
  Earth, air, and shores, and navigable seas:
  At length on Libyan realms he fixed his eyes--
  Whom, pondering thus on human miseries,
  When Venus saw, she with a lowly look,
  Not free from tears, her heavenly sire bespoke:--
  "O king of gods and men! whose awful hand                   }
  Disperses thunder on the seas and land;                     }
  Disposes all with absolute command;                         }
  How could my pious son thy power incense?
  Or what, alas! is vanished Troy's offence?
  Our hope of Italy not only lost,                            }
  On various seas by various tempests tossed,                 }
  But shut from every shore, and barred from every coast.     }
  You promised once, a progeny divine,
  Of Romans, rising from the Trojan line,
  In after-times should hold the world in awe,
  And to the land and ocean give the law.
  How is your doom reversed, which eased my care
  When Troy was ruined in that cruel war?
  Then fates to fates I could oppose: but now,
  When Fortune still pursues her former blow,
  What can I hope? What worse can still succeed?
  What end of labours has your will decreed?
  Antenor, from the midst of Grecian hosts,
  Could pass secure, and pierce the Illyrian coasts,
  Where, rolling down the steep, Timavus raves,
  And through nine channels disembogues his waves.
  At length he founded Padua's happy seat,
  And gave his Trojans a secure retreat;
  There fixed their arms, and there renewed their name,
  And there in quiet rules, and crowned with fame.
  But we, descended from your sacred line,
  Entitled to your heaven and rites divine,
  Are banished earth, and, for the wrath of one,
  Removed from Latium, and the promised throne.
  Are these our sceptres? these our due rewards?
  And is it thus that Jove his plighted faith regards?"
    To whom the Father of the immortal race,
  Smiling with that serene indulgent face,
  With which he drives the clouds and clears the skies,
  First gave a holy kiss; then thus replies:--
  "Daughter, dismiss thy fears: to thy desire,
  The fates of thine are fixed, and stand entire.
  Thou shalt behold thy wished Lavinian walls;
  And, ripe for heaven, when fate Æneas calls,
  Then shalt thou bear him up, sublime, to me:
  No councils have reversed my firm decree.
  And, lest new fears disturb thy happy state,
  Know, I have searched the mystic rolls of Fate:
  Thy son (nor is the appointed season far)
  In Italy shall wage successful war,
  Shall tame fierce nations in the bloody field,
  And sovereign laws impose, and cities build,
  Till, after every foe subdued, the sun
  Thrice through the signs his annual race shall run:
  This is his time prefixed. Ascanius then,
  Now called Iülus, shall begin his reign.
  He thirty rolling years the crown shall wear,
  Then from Lavinium shall the seat transfer,
  And, with hard labour, Alba-longa build.
  The throne with his succession shall be filled,
  Three hundred circuits more: then shall be seen
  Ilia the fair, a priestess and a queen,
  Who, full of Mars, in time, with kindly throes,
  Shall at a birth two goodly boys disclose.
  The royal babes a tawny wolf shall drain:
  Then Romulus his grandsire's throne shall gain,
  Of martial towers the founder shall become,
  The people Romans call, the city Rome.
  To them no bounds of empire I assign,
  Nor term of years to their immortal line.
  Even haughty Juno, who, with endless broils,
  Earth, seas, and heaven, and Jove himself, turmoils,
  At length atoned, her friendly power shall join,
  To cherish and advance the Trojan line.
  The subject world shall Rome's dominion own,
  And, prostrate, shall adore the nation of the gown.
  An age is ripening in revolving fate,
  When Troy shall overturn the Grecian state,
  And sweet revenge her conquering sons shall call,
  To crush the people that conspired her fall.
  Then Cæsar from the Julian stock shall rise,
  Whose empire ocean, and whose fame the skies,
  Alone shall bound; whom, fraught with eastern spoils,
  Our heaven, the just reward of human toils,
  Securely shall repay with rites divine;
  And incense shall ascend before his sacred shrine.
  Then dire debate, and impious war, shall cease,
  And the stern age be softened into peace:
  Then banished Faith shall once again return,
  And Vestal fires in hallowed temples burn;
  And Remus with Quirinus shall sustain
  The righteous laws, and fraud and force restrain.
  Janus himself before his fane shall wait,
  And keep the dreadful issues of his gate,
  With bolts and iron bars: within remains
  Imprisoned Fury, bound in brazen chains:
  High on a trophy raised, of useless arms,
  He sits, and threats the world with vain alarms."
    He said, and sent Cyllenius with command
  To free the ports, and ope the Punic land
  To Trojan guests; lest, ignorant of fate,
  The queen might force them from her town and state.
  Down from the steep of heaven Cyllenius flies,
  And cleaves with all his wings the yielding skies.
  Soon on the Libyan shore descends the god,
  Performs his message, and displays his rod.
  The surly murmurs of the people cease;
  And, as the Fates required, they give the peace.
  The queen herself suspends the rigid laws,
  The Trojans pities, and protects their cause.
    Mean time, in shades of night Æneas lies:
  Care seized his soul, and sleep forsook his eyes.
  But, when the sun restored the cheerful day,
  He rose, the coast and country to survey,
  Anxious and eager to discover more.--
  It looked a wild uncultivated shore:
  But, whether human kind, or beasts alone,
  Possessed the new-found region, was unknown.
  Beneath a ledge of rocks his fleet he hides:                }
  Tall trees surround the mountain's shady sides:             }
  The bending brow above a safe retreat provides.             }
  Armed with two pointed darts, he leaves his friends,
  And true Achates on his steps attends.
  Lo! in the deep recesses of the wood,
  Before his eyes his goddess mother stood--
  A huntress in her habit and her mien:
  Her dress a maid, her air confessed a queen.
  Bare were her knees, and knots her garments bind;           }
  Loose was her hair, and wantoned in the wind;               }
  Her hand sustained a bow; her quiver hung behind.           }
  She seemed a virgin of the Spartan blood:                 }
  With such array Harpalyce bestrode                        }
  Her Thracian courser, and out-stripped the rapid flood.   }
    "Ho! strangers! have you lately seen," she said,          }
  "One of my sisters, like myself arrayed,                    }
  Who crossed the lawn, or in the forest strayed?             }
  A painted quiver at her back she bore;                    }
  Varied with spots, a lynx's hide she wore;                }
  And at full cry pursued the tusky boar."                  }
    Thus Venus: thus her son replied again:--
  "None of your sisters have we heard or seen,
  O virgin! or what other name you bear
  Above that style:--O more than mortal fair!
  Your voice and mien celestial birth betray!
  If, as you seem, the sister of the day,
  Or one at least of chaste Diana's train,[96]
  Let not an humble suppliant sue in vain;
  But tell a stranger, long in tempests tossed,
  What earth we tread, and who commands the coast?
  Then on your name shall wretched mortals call,
  And offered victims at your altars fall."--
  "I dare not," she replied, "assume the name
  Of goddess, or celestial honours claim:
  For Tyrian virgins bows and quivers bear,
  And purple buskins o'er their ankles wear.
  Know, gentle youth, in Libyan lands you are--
  A people rude in peace, and rough in war.
  The rising city, which from far you see,
  Is Carthage, and a Tyrian colony.
  Phœnician Dido rules the growing state,                  }
  Who fled from Tyre, to shun her brother's hate.             }
  Great were her wrongs, her story full of fate;              }
  Which I will sum in short. Sichæus, known
  For wealth, and brother to the Punic throne,
  Possessed fair Dido's bed; and either heart
  At once was wounded with an equal dart.
  Her father gave her, yet a spotless maid;
  Pygmalion then the Tyrian sceptre swayed--
  One who contemned divine and human laws.
  Then strife ensued, and cursed gold the cause.
  The monarch, blinded with desire of wealth,
  With steel invades his brother's life by stealth;
  Before the sacred altar made him bleed,
  And long from her concealed the cruel deed.
  Some tale, some new pretence, he daily coined,
  To sooth his sister, and delude her mind.
  At length, in dead of night, the ghost appears              }
  Of her unhappy lord: the spectre stares,                    }
  And, with erected eyes, his bloody bosom bares.             }
  The cruel altars, and his fate, he tells,
  And the dire secret of his house reveals,
  Then warns the widow, and her household gods,
  To seek a refuge in remote abodes.
  Last, to support her in so long a way,
  He shows her where his hidden treasure lay.
  Admonished thus, and seized with mortal fright,
  The queen provides companions of her flight:
  They meet, and all combine to leave the state,
  Who hate the tyrant, or who fear his hate.
  They seize a fleet, which ready rigged they find;
  Nor is Pygmalion's treasure left behind.
  The vessels, heavy laden, put to sea
  With prosperous winds; a woman leads the way.
  I know not, if by stress of weather driven,
  Or was their fatal course disposed by heaven;
  At last they landed, where from far your eyes
  May view the turrets of new Carthage rise;
  There bought a space of ground, which (Byrsa called,
  From the bull's hide) they first inclosed, and walled.
  But whence are you? what country claims your birth?
  What seek you, strangers, on our Libyan earth?"
    To whom, with sorrow streaming from his eyes,
  And deeply sighing, thus her son replies:--
  "Could you with patience hear, or I relate,
  O nymph! the tedious annals of our fate,
  Through such a train of woes if I should run,
  The day would sooner than the tale be done.
  From ancient Troy, by force expelled, we came--
  If you by chance have heard the Trojan name.
  On various seas by various tempests tossed,
  At length we landed on your Libyan coast.
  The good Æneas am I called--a name,
  While Fortune favoured, not unknown to fame.
  My household gods, companions of my woes,
  With pious care I rescued from our foes.
  To fruitful Italy my course was bent;
  And from the king of heaven is my descent.
  With twice ten sail I crossed the Phrygian sea;
  Fate and my mother goddess led my way.
  Scarce seven, the thin remainders of my fleet,
  From storms preserved, within your harbour meet.
  Myself distressed, an exile, and unknown,                   }
  Debarred from Europe, and from Asia thrown,                 }
  In Libyan deserts wander thus alone."                       }
    His tender parent could no longer bear,
  But, interposing, sought to sooth his care.
  "Whoe'er you are--not unbeloved by heaven,
  Since on our friendly shore your ships are driven--
  Have courage: to the gods permit the rest,
  And to the queen expose your just request.
  Now take this earnest of success, for more:
  Your scattered fleet is joined upon the shore;
  The winds are changed, your friends from danger free;
  Or I renounce my skill in augury.
  Twelve swans behold in beauteous order move,
  And stoop with closing pinions from above;
  Whom late the bird of Jove had driven along,
  And through the clouds pursued the scattering throng:
  Now, all united in a goodly team,
  They skim the ground, and seek the quiet stream.
  As they, with joy returning, clap their wings,
  And ride the circuit of the skies in rings;
  Not otherwise your ships, and every friend,
  Already hold the port, or with swift sails descend.
  No more advice is needful; but pursue
  The path before you, and the town in view."
    Thus having said, she turned, and made appear
  Her neck refulgent, and dishevelled hair,
  Which, flowing from her shoulders, reached the ground,
  And widely spread ambrosial scents around.
  In length of train descends her sweeping gown;
  And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known.
  The prince pursued the parting deity
  With words like these:--"Ah! whither do you fly?
  Unkind and cruel! to deceive your son
  In borrowed shapes, and his embrace to shun;
  Never to bless my sight, but thus unknown;
  And still to speak in accents not your own."
  Against the goddess these complaints he made,
  But took the path, and her commands obeyed.
  They march obscure; for Venus kindly shrouds,
  With mists, their persons, and involves in clouds,
  That, thus unseen, their passage none might stay,
  Or force to tell the causes of their way.
  This part performed, the goddess flies sublime,
  To visit Paphos, and her native clime;
  Where garlands, ever green and ever fair,
  With vows are offered, and with solemn prayer:
  A hundred altars in her temple smoke;
  A thousand bleeding hearts her power invoke.
    They climb the next ascent, and, looking down,
  Now at a nearer distance view the town.
  The prince with wonder sees the stately towers,
  (Which late were huts, and shepherds' homely bowers)
  The gates and streets; and hears, from every part,
  The noise and busy concourse of the mart.
  The toiling Tyrians on each other call,
  To ply their labour: some extend the wall;
  Some build the citadel; the brawny throng
  Or dig, or push unwieldy stones along.
  Some for their dwellings chuse a spot of ground,
  Which, first designed, with ditches they surround.
  Some laws ordain; and some attend the choice
  Of holy senates, and elect by voice.
  Here some design a mole, while others there
  Lay deep foundations for a theatre,
  From marble quarries mighty columns hew,
  For ornaments of scenes, and future view.
  Such is their toil, and such their busy pains,
  As exercise the bees in flowery plains,
  When winter past, and summer scarce begun,
  Invites them forth to labour in the sun;
  Some lead their youth abroad, while some condense
  Their liquid store, and some in cells dispense;
  Some at the gate stand ready to receive
  The golden burden, and their friends relieve;
  All, with united force, combine to drive
  The lazy drones from the laborious hive.
  With envy stung, they view each other's deeds;
  The fragrant work with diligence proceeds.
  "Thrice happy you, whose walls already rise!"
  Æneas said, and viewed, with lifted eyes,
  Their lofty towers: then entering at the gate,
  Concealed in clouds, (prodigious to relate,)
  He mixed, unmarked, among the busy throng,
  Borne by the tide, and passed unseen along.
  Full in the centre of the town there stood,
  Thick set with trees, a venerable wood:
  The Tyrians, landing near this holy ground,
  And digging here, a prosperous omen found:
  From under earth a courser's head they drew,
  Their growth and future fortune to foreshew:
  This fated sign their foundress Juno gave,
  Of a soil fruitful, and a people brave.
  Sidonian Dido here with solemn state
  Did Juno's temple build, and consecrate,
  Enriched with gifts, and with a golden shrine;
  But more the goddess made the place divine.
  On brazen steps the marble threshold rose,
  And brazen plates the cedar beams inclose:
  The rafters are with brazen coverings crowned;
  The lofty doors on brazen hinges sound.
  What first Æneas in this place beheld,
  Revived his courage, and his fear expelled.
  For--while, expecting there the queen, he raised
  His wondering eyes, and round the temple gazed,
  Admired the fortune of the rising town,
  The striving artists, and their art's renown--
  He saw, in order painted on the wall,
  Whatever did unhappy Troy befall--
  The wars that fame around the world had blown,
  All to the life, and every leader known.
  There Agamemnon, Priam here, he spies,
  And fierce Achilles, who both kings defies.
  He stopped, and weeping said,--"O friend! even here
  The monuments of Trojan woes appear!
  Our known disasters fill even foreign lands:
  See there, where old unhappy Priam stands!
  Even the mute walls relate the warrior's fame,
  And Trojan griefs the Tyrians pity claim."
  He said, (his tears a ready passage find,)                  }
  Devouring what he saw so well designed,                     }
  And with an empty picture fed his mind:                     }
  For there he saw the fainting Grecians yield,
  And here the trembling Trojans quit the field,
  Pursued by fierce Achilles through the plain,
  On his high chariot driving o'er the slain.
  The tents of Rhesus next his grief renew,
  By their white sails betrayed to nightly view;
  And wakeful Diomede, whose cruel sword
  The centries slew, nor spared their slumbering lord,
  Then took the fiery steeds, ere yet the food
  Of Troy they taste, or drink the Xanthian flood.
  Elsewhere he saw where Troïlus defied
  Achilles, and unequal combat tried;
  Then, where the boy disarmed, with loosened reins,
  Was by his horses hurried o'er the plains,
  Hung by the neck and hair; and, dragged around,             }
  The hostile spear yet sticking in his wound,                }
  With tracks of blood inscribed the dusty ground.            }
  Meantime the Trojan dames, oppressed with woe,            }
  To Pallas' fane in long procession go,                    }
  In hopes to reconcile their heavenly foe.                 }
  They weep, they beat their breasts, they rend their hair,   }
  And rich embroidered vests for presents bear;               }
  But the stern goddess stands unmoved with prayer.           }
  Thrice round the Trojan walls Achilles drew
  The corpse of Hector, whom in fight he slew.
  Here Priam sues; and there, for sums of gold,
  The lifeless body of his son is sold.
  So sad an object, and so well expressed,
  Drew sighs and groans from the grieved hero's breast,
  To see the figure of his lifeless friend,
  And his old sire his helpless hands extend.
  Himself he saw amidst the Grecian train,
  Mixed in the bloody battle on the plain;
  And swarthy Memnon in his arms he knew,
  His pompous ensigns, and his Indian crew.
  Penthesilea there, with haughty grace,
  Leads to the wars an Amazonian race:
  In their right hands a pointed dart they wield;
  The left, for ward, sustains the lunar shield.
  Athwart her breast a golden belt she throws,                }
  Amidst the press alone provokes a thousand foes,            }
  And dares her maiden arms to manly force oppose.            }
    Thus while the Trojan prince employs his eyes,
  Fixed on the walls with wonder and surprise,
  The beauteous Dido, with a numerous train,
  And pomp of guards, ascends the sacred fane.
  Such on Eurotas' banks, or Cynthus' height,
  Diana seems; and so she charms the sight,
  When in the dance the graceful goddess leads
  The choir of nymphs, and overtops their heads.
  Known by her quiver, and her lofty mien,
  She walks majestic, and she looks their queen:
  Latona sees her shine above the rest,
  And feeds with secret joy her silent breast.
  Such Dido was; with such becoming state,
  Amidst the crowd, she walks serenely great.
  Their labour to her future sway she speeds,
  And passing with a gracious glance proceeds,
  Then mounts the throne, high placed before the shrine;
  In crowds around, the swarming people join.
  She takes petitions, and dispenses laws,
  Hears and determines every private cause:
  Their tasks in equal portions she divides,
  And, where unequal, there by lot decides.
  Another way by chance Æneas bends
  His eyes, and unexpected sees his friends,
  Antheus, Sergestus grave, Cloanthus strong,
  And at their backs a mighty Trojan throng,
  Whom late the tempest on the billows tossed,
  And widely scattered on another coast.
  The prince, unseen, surprised with wonder stands,
  And longs, with joyful haste, to join their hands:
  But, doubtful of the wished event, he stays,
  And from the hollow cloud his friends surveys,
  Impatient till they told their present state,
  And where they left their ships, and what their fate,
  And why they came, and what was their request;
  For these were sent commissioned by the rest,
  To sue for leave to land their sickly men,
  And gain admission to the gracious queen.
  Entering, with cries they filled the holy fane;
  Then thus, with lowly voice, Ilioneus began:--
  "O queen! indulged by favour of the gods
  To found an empire in these new abodes,
  To build a town, with statutes to restrain
  The wild inhabitants beneath thy reign--
  We wretched Trojans, tossed on every shore,
  From sea to sea, thy clemency implore.
  Forbid the fires our shipping to deface!                    }
  Receive the unhappy fugitives to grace,                     }
  And spare the remnant of a pious race!                      }
  We come not with design of wasteful prey,
  To drive the country, force the swains away:
  Nor such our strength, nor such is our desire;
  The vanquished dare not to such thoughts aspire.
  A land there is, Hesperia named of old--
  The soil is fruitful, and the men are bold--
  The Œnotrians held it once--by common fame,
  Now called Italia, from the leader's name.
  To that sweet region was our voyage bent,
  When winds, and every warring element,
  Disturbed our course, and, far from sight of land,
  Cast our torn vessels on the moving sand:
  The sea came on; the South, with mighty roar,
  Dispersed and dashed the rest upon the rocky shore.
  Those few you see escaped the storm, and fear,
  Unless you interpose, a shipwreck here.
  What men, what monsters, what inhuman race,
  What laws, what barbarous customs of the place,
  Shut up a desert shore to drowning men,
  And drive us to the cruel seas again?
  If our hard fortune no compassion draws,                    }
  Nor hospitable rights, nor human laws,                      }
  The gods are just, and will revenge our cause.              }
  Æneas was our prince--a juster lord,                      }
  Or nobler warrior, never drew a sword--                   }
  Observant of the right, religious of his word.            }
  If yet he lives, and draws this vital air,
  Nor we, his friends, of safety shall despair,
  Nor you, great queen, these offices repent,
  Which he will equal, and perhaps augment.
  We want not cities, nor Sicilian coasts,
  Where king Acestes Trojan lineage boasts.
  Permit our ships a shelter on your shores,
  Refitted from your woods with planks and oars,
  That, if our prince be safe, we may renew
  Our destined course, and Italy pursue.
  But if, O best of men! the Fates ordain,
  That thou art swallowed in the Libyan main,
  And if our young Iülus be no more,
  Dismiss our navy from your friendly shore,
  That we to good Acestes may return,
  And with our friends our common losses mourn."
  Thus spoke Ilioneus: the Trojan crew
  With cries and clamours his request renew.
  The modest queen a while, with downcast eyes,
  Pondered the speech, then briefly thus replies:--
  "Trojans! dismiss your fears; my cruel fate,
  And doubts attending an unsettled state,
  Force me to guard my coast from foreign foes.
  Who has not heard the story of your woes,
  The name and fortune of your native place,
  The fame and valour of the Phrygian race?
  We Tyrians are not so devoid of sense,
  Nor so remote from Phœbus' influence.
  Whether to Latian shores your course is bent,               }
  Or, driven by tempests from your first intent,              }
  You seek the good Acestes' government,                      }
  Your men shall be received, your fleet repaired,
  And sail, with ships of convoy for your guard:
  Or, would you stay, and join your friendly powers           }
  To raise and to defend the Tyrian towers,                   }
  My wealth, my city, and myself, are yours.                  }
  And would to heaven, the storm, you felt, would bring
  On Carthaginian coasts your wandering king.
  My people shall, by my command, explore
  The ports and creeks of every winding shore,
  And towns, and wilds, and shady woods, in quest
  Of so renowned and so desired a guest."
    Raised in his mind the Trojan hero stood,
  And longed to break from out his ambient cloud;
  Achates found it, and thus urged his way:--
  "From whence, O goddess-born, this long delay?
  What more can you desire, your welcome sure,
  Your fleet in safety, and your friend secure?
  One only wants; and him we saw in vain
  Oppose the storm, and swallowed in the main.
  Orontes in his fate our forfeit paid;
  The rest agrees with what your mother said."
  Scarce had he spoken, when the cloud gave way,
  The mists flew upward, and dissolved in day.
  The Trojan chief appeared in open sight,
  August in visage, and serenely bright.
  His mother goddess, with her hands divine,
  Had formed his curling locks, and made his temples shine,
  And given his rolling eyes a sparkling grace,
  And breathed a youthful vigour on his face;
  Like polished ivory, beauteous to behold,
  Or Parian marble, when enchased in gold;
  Thus radiant from the circling cloud he broke,
  And thus with manly modesty he spoke:--
  "He whom you seek am I; by tempests tossed,
  And saved from shipwreck on your Libyan coast;
  Presenting, gracious queen, before your throne,
  A prince that owes his life to you alone.
  Fair majesty! the refuge and redress
  Of those whom Fate pursues, and wants oppress!
  You, who your pious offices employ
  To save the reliques of abandoned Troy;
  Receive the shipwrecked on your friendly shore,
  With hospitable rites relieve the poor;
  Associate in your town a wandering train,
  And strangers in your palace entertain.
  What thanks can wretched fugitives return,
  Who, scattered through the world, in exile mourn?
  The gods, (if gods to goodness are inclined--
  If acts of mercy touch their heavenly mind,)
  And, more than all the gods, your generous heart,
  Conscious of worth, requite its own desert!
  In you this age is happy, and this earth,
  And parents more than mortal gave you birth.
  While rolling rivers into seas shall run,
  And round the space of heaven the radiant sun;
  While trees the mountain-tops with shades supply,
  Your honour, name, and praise, shall never die.
  Whate'er abode my fortune has assigned,
  Your image shall be present in my mind."
  Thus having said, he turned with pious haste,               }
  And joyful his expecting friends embraced:                  }
  With his right hand Ilioneus he graced,[97]                 }
  Serestus with his left; then to his breast                }
  Cloanthus and the noble Gyas pressed;                     }
  And so by turns descended to the rest.                    }
    The Tyrian queen stood fixed upon his face,
  Pleased with his motions, ravished with his grace;
  Admired his fortunes, more admired the man;
  Then recollected stood, and thus began:--
  "What fate, O goddess-born! what angry powers
  Have cast you shipwrecked on our barren shores?
  Are you the great Æneas, known to fame,
  Who from celestial seed your lineage claim?
  The same Æneas, whom fair Venus bore
  To famed Anchises on the Idæan shore?
  It calls into my mind, though then a child,
  When Teucer came, from Salamis exiled,
  And sought my father's aid, to be restored:
  My father Belus then with fire and sword
  Invaded Cyprus, made the region bare,
  And, conquering, finished the successful war.
  From him the Trojan siege I understood,
  The Grecian chiefs, and your illustrious blood.
  Your foe himself the Dardan valour praised,
  And his own ancestry from Trojans raised.
  Enter, my noble guest! and you shall find,
  If not a costly welcome, yet a kind:
  For I myself, like you, have been distressed,
  Till heaven afforded me this place of rest.
  Like you, an alien in a land unknown,
  I learn to pity woes so like my own."
  She said, and to the palace led her guest,
  Then offered incense, and proclaimed a feast.
  Nor yet less careful for her absent friends,
  Twice ten fat oxen to the ships she sends;
  Besides a hundred boars, a hundred lambs,
  With bleating cries, attend their milky dams;
  And jars of generous wine, and spacious bowls,
  She gives, to cheer the sailors' drooping souls.
  Now purple hangings clothe the palace-walls,
  And sumptuous feasts are made in splendid halls:
  On Tyrian carpets, richly wrought, they dine;
  With loads of massy plate the side-boards shine,
  And antique vases, all of gold embossed,
  (The gold itself inferior to the cost
  Of curious work,) where on the sides were seen              }
  The fights and figures of illustrious men,                  }
  From their first founder to the present queen.              }
    The good Æneas, whose paternal care
  Iülus' absence could no longer bear,
  Dispatched Achates to the ships in haste,
  To give a glad relation of the past,
  And, fraught with precious gifts, to bring the boy,
  Snatched from the ruins of unhappy Troy--
  A robe of tissue, stiff with golden wire;
  An upper vest, once Helen's rich attire,
  From Argos by the famed adultress brought,
  With golden flowers and winding foliage wrought--
  Her mother Leda's present, when she came
  To ruin Troy, and set the world on flame;
  The sceptre Priam's eldest daughter bore,
  Her orient necklace, and the crown she wore
  Of double texture, glorious to behold;
  One order set with gems, and one with gold.
  Instructed thus, the wise Achates goes,
  And, in his diligence, his duty shows.
    But Venus, anxious for her son's affairs,
  New counsels tries, and new designs prepares:
  That Cupid should assume the shape and face
  Of sweet Ascanius, and the sprightly grace;
  Should bring the presents, in her nephew's stead,
  And in Eliza's veins the gentle poison shed:
  For much she feared the Tyrians, double-tongued,
  And knew the town to Juno's care belonged.
  These thoughts by night her golden slumbers broke,
  And thus, alarmed, to winged Love she spoke:--
  "My son, my strength, whose mighty power alone
  Controuls the Thunderer on his awful throne,
  To thee thy much-afflicted mother flies,
  And on thy succour and thy faith relies.
  Thou know'st, my son, how Jove's revengeful wife,
  By force and fraud, attempts thy brother's life;
  And often hast thou mourned with me his pains.              }
  Him Dido now with blandishment detains;                     }
  But I suspect the town where Juno reigns.                   }
  For this, 'tis needful to prevent her art,
  And fire with love the proud Phœnician's heart--
  A love so violent, so strong, so sure,
  That neither age can change, nor art can cure.
  How this may be performed, now take my mind:
  Ascanius, by his father is designed
  To come, with presents laden, from the port,
  To gratify the queen, and gain the court.
  I mean to plunge the boy in pleasing sleep,
  And, ravished, in Idalian bowers to keep,
  Or high Cythera, that the sweet deceit
  May pass unseen, and none prevent the cheat.
  Take thou his form and shape. I beg the grace,              }
  But only for a night's revolving space,                     }
  Thyself a boy, assume a boy's dissembled face;              }
  That when, amidst the fervour of the feast,
  The Tyrian hugs and fonds thee on her breast,
  And with sweet kisses in her arms constrains,
  Thou may'st infuse thy venom in her veins."
  The god of love obeys, and sets aside
  His bow and quiver, and his plumy pride;
  He walks Iülus in his mother's sight,
  And in the sweet resemblance takes delight.
    The goddess then to young Ascanius flies,
  And in a pleasing slumber seals his eyes:
  Lulled in her lap, amidst a train of Loves,
  She gently bears him to her blissful groves,
  Then with a wreath of myrtle crowns his head,
  And softly lays him on a flowery bed.
  Cupid meantime assumed his form and face,
  Following Achates with a shorter pace,
  And brought the gifts. The queen already sate
  Amidst the Trojan lords, in shining state,
  High on a golden bed: her princely guest
  Was next her side;[98] in order sate the rest.
  Then canisters with bread are heaped on high;               }
  The attendants water for their hands supply,                }
  And, having washed, with silken towels dry.                 }
  Next fifty handmaids in long order bore
  The censers, and with fumes the gods adore:
  Then youths and virgins, twice as many, join
  To place the dishes, and to serve the wine.
  The Tyrian train, admitted to the feast,
  Approach, and on the painted couches rest.
  All on the Trojan gifts with wonder gaze,
  But view the beauteous boy with more amaze,
  His rosy-coloured cheeks, his radiant eyes,
  His motions, voice, and shape, and all the god's disguise;
  Nor pass unpraised the vest and veil divine,
  Which wandering foliage and rich flowers entwine.
  But, far above the rest, the royal dame,
  (Already doomed to love's disastrous flame,)
  With eyes insatiate, and tumultuous joy,
  Beholds the presents, and admires the boy.
  The guileful god, about the hero long,
  With children's play, and false embraces, hung;
  Then sought the queen: she took him to her arms
  With greedy pleasure, and devoured his charms.
  Unhappy Dido little thought what guest,
  How dire a god, she drew so near her breast.
  But he, not mindless of his mother's prayer,                }
  Works in the pliant bosom of the fair,                      }
  And moulds her heart anew, and blots her former care.       }
  The dead is to the living love resigned;
  And all Æneas enters in her mind.
    Now, when the rage of hunger was appeased,
  The meat removed, and every guest was pleased,
  The golden bowls with sparkling wine are crowned,
  And through the palace cheerful cries resound.
  From gilded roofs depending lamps display
  Nocturnal beams, that emulate the day.
  A golden bowl, that shone with gems divine,                 }
  The queen commanded to be crowned with wine--               }
  The bowl that Belus used, and all the Tyrian line.          }
  Then, silence through the hall proclaimed, she spoke:--
  "O hospitable Jove! we thus invoke,
  With solemn rites, thy sacred name and power;
  Bless to both nations this auspicious hour!
  So may the Trojan and the Tyrian line
  In lasting concord from this day combine.
  Thou, Bacchus, god of joys and friendly cheer,
  And gracious Juno, both be present here!
  And you, my lords of Tyre, your vows address
  To heaven with mine, to ratify the peace."
  The goblet then she took, with nectar crowned,
  (Sprinkling the first libations on the ground,)
  And raised it to her mouth with sober grace,
  Then, sipping, offered to the next in place.
  'Twas Bitias whom she called--a thirsty soul;
  He took the challenge, and embraced the bowl,
  With pleasure swilled the gold, nor ceased to draw,
  Till he the bottom of the brimmer saw.
  The goblet goes around: Iöpas brought
  His golden lyre, and sung what ancient Atlas taught--
  The various labours of the wandering moon,
  And whence proceed the eclipses of the sun;
  The original of men and beasts; and whence                  }
  The rains arise, and fires their warmth dispense,           }
  And fixed and erring stars dispose their influence;         }
  What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays
  The summer nights, and shortens winter days.
  With peals of shouts the Tyrians praise the song;
  Those peals are echoed by the Trojan throng.
  The unhappy queen with talk prolonged the night,
  And drank large draughts of love with vast delight;
  Of Priam much inquired, of Hector more;                     }
  Then asked what arms the swarthy Memnon wore,               }
  What troops he landed on the Trojan shore;                  }
  The steeds of Diomede varied the discourse,
  And fierce Achilles, with his matchless force;
  At length, as Fate and her ill stars required,
  To hear the series of the war desired.
  "Relate at large, my god-like guest," she said,
  "The Grecian stratagems, the town betrayed:
  The fatal issue of so long a war,
  Your flight, your wanderings, and your woes, declare;
  For, since on every sea, on every coast,
  Your men have been distressed, your navy tossed,
  Seven times the sun has either tropic viewed,
  The winter banished, and the spring renewed."


FOOTNOTES:

[94] This was an obliging promise to Æolus, who had been so
unhappy in his former children, Macareus and Canace.--DRYDEN.

[95] Note I.

[96] Note II.

[97] The early editions read, _was graced_; but Dr Carey
judiciously substitutes _he_, for the preservation of both sense and
grammar.

[98] Note III.




NOTES ON ÆNEÏS, BOOK I.


Note I.

  _The realms of ocean, and the fields of air,
  Are mine, not his._--P. 237.

Poetically speaking, the _fields of air_ are under the command of
Juno, and her vicegerent Æolus. Why then does Neptune call them his? I
answer, Because, being god of the seas, Æolus could raise no tempest
in the atmosphere above them without his leave. But why does Juno
address to her own substitute? I answer, He had an immediate power over
the winds, whom Juno desires to employ on her revenge. That power was
absolute by land; which Virgil plainly insinuates: for, when Boreas
and his brethren were let loose, he says at first, _terras turbine
perflant_--then adds, _Incubuere mari_. To raise a tempest on the sea,
was usurpation on the prerogative of Neptune, who had given him no
leave, and therefore was enraged at his attempt. I may also add, that
they who are in a passion, as Neptune then was, are apt to assume to
themselves more than is properly their due.


Note II.

  _O virgin!----&c.
  If, as you seem, the sister of the day,
  Or one at least of chaste Diana's train._--P. 244.

Thus in the original--

  _O quam te memorem, virgo--------
  An Phœbi soror, an nympharum sanguinis una?_

This is a family compliment, which Æneas here bestows on Venus. His
father Anchises had used the very same to that goddess when he courted
her. This appears by that very ancient Greek poem[99], in which that
amour is so beautifully described, and which is thought Homer's, though
it seems to be written before his age.


Note III.

  ----_Her princely guest
  Was next her side._--P. 259.

This, I confess, is improperly translated, and according to the modern
fashion of sitting at table. But the ancient custom of lying on beds
had not been understood by the unlearned reader.


FOOTNOTES:

[99] The Hymn on Venus.




ÆNEÏS,




BOOK II.

ARGUMENT.

 _Æneas relates how the city of Troy was taken, after a ten years'
 siege, by the treachery of Sinon, and the stratagem of a wooden horse.
 He declares the fixed resolution he had taken not to survive the
 ruin of his country, and the various adventures he met with in the
 defence of it. At last, having been before advised by Hector's ghost,
 and now by the appearance of his mother Venus, he is prevailed upon
 to leave the town, and settle his household gods in another country.
 In order to do this, he carries off his father on his shoulders, and
 leads his little son by the hand, his wife following him behind.
 When he comes to the place appointed for the general rendezvous, he
 finds a great confluence of people, but misses his wife, whose ghost
 afterwards appears to him, and tells him the land which was designed
 for him._[100]


  All were attentive to the godlike man,
  When from his lofty couch he thus began:--
  "Great queen, what you command me to relate,
  Renews the sad remembrance of our fate:
  An empire from its old foundations rent,
  And every woe the Trojans underwent;
  A peopled city made a desert place;
  All that I saw, and part of which I was;
  Not even the hardest of our foes could hear,
  Nor stern Ulysses tell, without a tear.
  And now the latter watch of wasting night,
  And setting stars, to kindly rest invite.
  But, since you take such interest in our woe,
  And Troy's disastrous end desire to know,
  I will restrain my tears, and briefly tell
  What in our last and fatal night befell.
    By destiny compelled, and in despair,
  The Greeks grew weary of the tedious war,
  And, by Minerva's aid, a fabric reared,
  Which like a steed of monstrous height appeared:
  The sides were planked with pine: they feigned it made
  For their return, and this the vow they paid.
  Thus they pretend, but in the hollow side,
  Selected numbers of their soldiers hide:
  With inward arms the dire machine they load,
  And iron bowels stuff the dark abode.
  In sight of Troy lies Tenedos, an isle
  (While Fortune did on Priam's empire smile)
  Renowned for wealth; but, since, a faithless bay,
  Where ships exposed to wind and weather lay.
  There was their fleet concealed. We thought, for Greece
  Their sails were hoisted, and our fears release.
  The Trojans, cooped within their walls so long,
  Unbar their gates, and issue in a throng,
  Like swarming bees, and with delight survey
  The camp deserted, where the Grecians lay:
  The quarters of the several chiefs they showed--            }
  Here Phœnix, here Achilles, made abode;                     }
  Here joined the battles; there the navy rode.               }
  Part on the pile their wondering eyes employ--
  The pile by Pallas raised to ruin Troy.
  Thymœtes first ('tis doubtful whether hired,
  Or so the Trojan destiny required)
  Moved, that the ramparts might be broken down,
  To lodge the monster fabric in the town.
  But Capys, and the rest of sounder mind,
  The fatal present to the flames designed,
  Or to the watery deep; at least to bore
  The hollow sides, and hidden frauds explore.
  The giddy vulgar, as their fancies guide,
  With noise say nothing, and in parts divide.
  Laocoön, followed by a numerous crowd,
  Ran from the fort, and cried, from far, aloud:--
  "O wretched countrymen! what fury reigns?
  What more than madness has possessed your brains?
  Think you the Grecians from your coasts are gone?
  And are Ulysses' arts no better known?
  This hollow fabric either must inclose,
  Within its blind recess, our secret foes;
  Or 'tis an engine raised above the town,
  To o'erlook the walls, and then to batter down.
  Somewhat is sure designed, by fraud or force--
  Trust not their presents, nor admit the horse."
  Thus having said, against the steed he threw
  His forceful spear, which, hissing as it flew,
  Pierced through the yielding planks of jointed wood,
  And trembling in the hollow belly stood.
  The sides, transpierced, return a rattling sound,
  And groans of Greeks inclosed come issuing through the wound.
  And, had not heaven the fall of Troy designed,                }
  Or had not men been fated to be blind,                        }
  Enough was said and done to inspire a better mind.            }
  Then had our lances pierced the treacherous wood,
  And Ilian towers and Priam's empire stood.
  Meantime, with shouts, the Trojan shepherds bring
  A captive Greek in bands, before the king--
  Taken, to take--who made himself their prey,
  To impose on their belief, and Troy betray;
  Fixed on his aim, and obstinately bent
  To die undaunted, or to circumvent.
  About the captive, tides of Trojans flow;
  All press to see, and some insult the foe.
  Now hear how well the Greeks their wiles disguised;
  Behold a nation in a man comprised.
  Trembling the miscreant stood; unarmed and bound,
  He stared, and rolled his hagard eyes around,
  Then said, "Alas! what earth remains, what sea
  Is open to receive unhappy me?
  What fate a wretched fugitive attends,
  Scorned by my foes, abandoned by my friends?"
  He said, and sighed, and cast a rueful eye;
  Our pity kindles, and our passions die.
  We cheer the youth to make his own defence,
  And freely tell us what he was, and whence:
  What news he could impart, we long to know,
  And what to credit from a captive foe.
    His fear at length dismissed, he said,--"Whate'er
  My fate ordains, my words shall be sincere:
  I neither can nor dare my birth disclaim;
  Greece is my country, Sinon is my name.
  Though plunged by Fortune's power in misery,
  'Tis not in Fortune's power to make me lie.
  If any chance has hither brought the name
  Of Palamedes, not unknown to fame,
  Who suffered from the malice of the times,
  Accused and sentenced for pretended crimes,
  Because the fatal wars he would prevent;
  Whose death the wretched Greeks too late lament--
  Me, then a boy, my father, poor and bare                    }
  Of other means, committed to his care,                      }
  His kinsman and companion in the war.                       }
  While Fortune favoured, while his arms support
  The cause, and ruled the counsels of the court,
  I made some figure there; nor was my name
  Obscure, nor I without my share of fame.
  But when Ulysses, with fallacious arts,
  Had made impression in the people's hearts,
  And forged a treason in my patron's name,
  (I speak of things too far divulged by fame,)
  My kinsman fell. Then I, without support,
  In private mourned his loss, and left the court.
  Mad as I was, I could not bear his fate
  With silent grief, but loudly blamed the state,
  And cursed the direful author of my woes.--
  'Twas told again; and hence my ruin rose.
  I threatened, if indulgent heaven once more                 }
  Would land me safely on my native shore,                    }
  His death with double vengeance to restore.                 }
  This moved the murderer's hate; and soon ensued
  The effects of malice from a man so proud.
  Ambiguous rumours through the camp he spread,
  And sought, by treason, my devoted head;
  New crimes invented; left unturned no stone,
  To make my guilt appear, and hide his own;
  Till Calchas was by force and threatening wrought--
  But why--why dwell I on that anxious thought?
  If on my nation just revenge you seek,
  And 'tis to appear a foe, to appear a Greek;
  Already you my name and country know;
  Assuage your thirst of blood, and strike the blow:
  My death will both the kingly brothers please,
  And set insatiate Ithacus at ease."
  This fair unfinished tale, these broken starts,             }
  Raised expectations in our longing hearts;                  }
  Unknowing as we were in Grecian arts.                       }
  His former trembling once again renewed,
  With acted fear, the villain thus pursued:--
  "Long had the Grecians (tired with fruitless care,
  And wearied with an unsuccessful war)
  Resolved to raise the siege, and leave the town;
  And, had the gods permitted, they had gone.
  But oft the wintery seas, and southern winds,
  Withstood their passage home, and changed their minds.
  Portents and prodigies their souls amazed;
  But most, when this stupendous pile was raised:
  Then flaming meteors, hung in air, were seen,
  And thunders rattled through a sky serene.
  Dismayed, and fearful of some dire event,
  Eurypylus, to inquire their fate, was sent.
  He from the gods this dreadful answer brought:              }
  'O Grecians, when the Trojan shores you sought,             }
  Your passage with a virgin's blood was bought:              }
  So must your safe return be bought again,
  And Grecian blood once more atone the main.'
  The spreading rumour round the people ran;
  All feared, and each believed himself the man.
  Ulysses took the advantage of their fright;
  Called Calchas, and produced in open sight,
  Then bade him name the wretch, ordained by fate
  The public victim, to redeem the state.
  Already some presaged the dire event,
  And saw what sacrifice Ulysses meant.
  For twice five days the good old seer withstood
  The intended treason, and was dumb to blood,
  Till, tired with endless clamours and pursuit
  Of Ithacus, he stood no longer mute,
  But, as it was agreed, pronounced that I
  Was destined by the wrathful gods to die.
  All praised the sentence, pleased the storm should fall
  On one alone, whose fury threatened all.
  The dismal day was come; the priests prepare
  Their leavened cakes, and fillets for my hair.
   I followed nature's laws, and must avow,
  I broke my bonds, and fled the fatal blow.
  Hid in a weedy lake all night I lay,
  Secure of safety when they sailed away.
  But now what further hopes for me remain,
  To see my friends, or native soil, again;
  My tender infants, or my careful sire,
  Whom they returning will to death require;
  Will perpetrate on them their first design,
  And take the forfeit of their heads for mine?
  Which, O! if pity mortal minds can move,
  If there be faith below, or gods above,
  If innocence and truth can claim desert,
  Ye Trojans, from an injured wretch avert."
    False tears true pity move; the king commands
  To loose his fetters, and unbind his hands,
  Then adds these friendly words:--"Dismiss thy fears;
  Forget the Greeks; be mine as thou wert theirs;
  But truly tell, was it for force or guile,
  Or some religious end, you raised the pile?"
  Thus said the king.--He, full of fraudful arts,
  This well-invented tale for truth imparts:--
  "Ye lamps of heaven!" he said, and lifted high
  His hands now free,--"thou venerable sky!
  Inviolable powers, adored with dread!                       }
  Ye fatal fillets, that once bound this head!                }
  Ye sacred altars, from whose flames I fled!                 }
  Be all of you adjured; and grant I may,
  Without a crime, the ungrateful Greeks betray,
  Reveal the secrets of the guilty state,
  And justly punish whom I justly hate!
  But you, O king, preserve the faith you gave,
  If I, to save myself, your empire save.
  The Grecian hopes, and all the attempts they made,
  Were only founded on Minerva's aid.
  But from the time when impious Diomede,
  And false Ulysses, that inventive head,
  Her fatal image from the temple drew,
  The sleeping guardians of the castle slew,
  Her virgin statue with their bloody hands
  Polluted, and profaned her holy bands;
  From thence the tide of fortune left their shore,
  And ebbed much faster than it flowed before:
  Their courage languished, as their hopes decayed;
  And Pallas, now averse, refused her aid.
  Nor did the goddess doubtfully declare
  Her altered mind, and alienated care.
  When first her fatal image touched the ground,
  She sternly cast her glaring eyes around,
  That sparkled as they rolled, and seemed to threat:
  Her heavenly limbs distilled a briny sweat.
  Thrice from the ground she leaped, was seen to wield
  Her brandished lance, and shake her horrid shield.
  Then Calchas bade our host for flight prepare,
  And hope no conquest from the tedious war,
  Till first they sailed for Greece; with prayers besought
  Her injured power, and better omens brought.
  And now their navy ploughs the watery main,                 }
  Yet soon expect it on your shores again,                    }
  With Pallas pleased; as Calchas did ordain.                 }
  But first, to reconcile the blue-eyed maid
  For her stolen statue and her tower betrayed,
  Warned by the seer, to her offended name
  We raised and dedicate this wonderous frame,
  So lofty, lest through your forbidden gates
  It pass, and intercept our better fates:
  For, once admitted there, our hopes are lost;
  And Troy may then a new Palladium boast;
  For so religion and the gods ordain,
  That, if you violate with hands profane
  Minerva's gift, your town in flames shall burn,
  (Which omen, O ye gods, on Græcia turn!)
  But if it climb, with your assisting hands,
  The Trojan walls, and in the city stands;
  Then Troy shall Argos and Mycenæ burn,
  And the reverse of fate on us return."
    With such deceits he gained their easy hearts,
  Too prone to credit his perfidious arts.
  What Diomede, nor Thetis' greater son,                      }
  A thousand ships, nor ten years' siege, had done--          }
  False tears and fawning words the city won.                 }
    A greater omen, and of worse portent,                   }
  Did our unwary minds with fear torment,                   }
  Concurring to produce the dire event.                     }
  Laocoön, Neptune's priest by lot that year,
  With solemn pomp then sacrificed a steer;
  When (dreadful to behold!) from sea we spied                }
  Two serpents, ranked abreast, the seas divide,              }
  And smoothly sweep along the swelling tide.                 }
  Their flaming crests above the waves they show;
  Their bellies seem to burn the seas below;
  Their speckled tails advance to steer their course,
  And on the sounding shore the flying billows force.
  And now the strand, and now the plain, they held.
  Their ardent eyes with bloody streaks were filled;
  Their nimble tongues they brandished as they came,
  And licked their hissing jaws, that sputtered flame.
  We fled amazed; their destined way they take,
  And to Laocoön and his children make;
  And first around the tender boys they wind,
  Then with their sharpened fangs their limbs and bodies grind.
  The wretched father, running to their aid
  With pious haste, but vain, they next invade;
  Twice round his waist their winding volumes rolled;
  And twice about his gasping throat they fold.
  The priest thus doubly choked--their crests divide,
  And towering o'er his head in triumph ride.
  With both his hands he labours at the knots;
  His holy fillets the blue venom blots;
  His roaring fills the flitting air around.
  Thus, when an ox receives a glancing wound,
  He breaks his bands, the fatal altar flies,
  And with loud bellowings breaks the yielding skies.
  Their tasks performed, the serpents quit their prey,
  And to the tower of Pallas make their way:
  Couched at her feet, they lie protected there,
  By her large buckler, and protended spear.
  Amazement seizes all; the general cry
  Proclaims Laocoön justly doomed to die,
  Whose hand the will of Pallas had withstood,
  And dared to violate the sacred wood.
  All vote to admit the steed, that vows be paid,
  And incense offered, to the offended maid.
  A spacious breach is made; the town lies bare;
  Some hoisting-levers, some the wheels, prepare,
  And fasten to the horses feet; the rest
  With cables haul along the unwieldy beast.
  Each on his fellow for assistance calls;
  At length the fatal fabric mounts the walls,
  Big with destruction. Boys with chaplets crowned,
  And choirs of virgins, sing and dance around.
  Thus raised aloft, and then descending down,
  It enters o'er our heads, and threats the town.
  O sacred city, built by hands divine!
  O valiant heroes of the Trojan line!
  Four times he struck; as oft the clashing sound
  Of arms was heard, and inward groans rebound.
  Yet, mad with zeal, and blinded with our fate,
  We haul along the horse in solemn state;
  Then place the dire portent within the tower.
  Cassandra cried, and cursed the unhappy hour;
  Foretold our fate; but, by the god's decree,
  All heard, and none believed the prophecy.
  With branches we the fanes adorn, and waste,
  In jollity, the day ordained to be the last.
  Meantime the rapid heavens rolled down the light,
  And on the shaded ocean rushed the night;
  Our men, secure, nor guards nor sentries held,
  But easy sleep their weary limbs compelled.
  The Grecians had embarked their naval powers
  From Tenedos, and sought our well-known shores,
  Safe under covert of the silent night,
  And guided by the imperial galley's light;
  When Sinon, favoured by the partial gods,
  Unlocked the horse, and oped his dark abodes;
  Restored to vital air our hidden foes,
  Who joyful from their long confinement rose.
  Thessander bold, and Sthenelus their guide,
  And dire Ulysses, down the cable slide:
  Then Thoas, Athamas, and Pyrrhus, haste;
  Nor was the Podalirian hero last,
  Nor injured Menelaüs, nor the famed
  Epeus, who the fatal engine framed.
  A nameless crowd succeed; their forces join
  To invade the town, oppressed with sleep and wine.
  Those few they find awake, first meet their fate;
  Then to their fellows they unbar the gate.
    'Twas in the dead of night, when sleep repairs
  Our bodies worn with toils, our minds with cares,
  When Hector's ghost before my sight appears:
  A bloody shroud he seemed, and bathed in tears;
  Such as he was, when, by Pelides slain,
  Thessalian coursers dragged him o'er the plain.
  Swoln were his feet, as when the thongs were thrust
  Through the bored holes; his body black with dust;
  Unlike that Hector, who returned, from toils
  Of war, triumphant in Æacian spoils,
  Or him, who made the fainting Greeks retire,
  And launched against their navy Phrygian fire.
  His hair and beard stood stiffened with his gore;
  And all the wounds he for his country bore,
  Now streamed afresh, and with new purple ran.               }
  I wept to see the visionary man,                            }
  And, while my trance continued, thus began:--               }
  "O light of Trojans, and support of Troy,
  Thy father's champion, and thy country's joy!
  O, long expected by thy friends! from whence
  Art thou so late returned for our defence?
  Do we behold thee, wearied as we are,
  With length of labours, and with toils of war?
  After so many funerals of thy own,
  Art thou restored to thy declining town?
  But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace
  Deforms the manly features of thy face?"
    To this the spectre no reply did frame,
  But answered to the cause for which he came,
  And, groaning from the bottom of his breast,
  This warning, in these mournful words, expressed:
  "O goddess-born! escape, by timely flight,
  The flames and horrors of this fatal night.
  The foes already have possessed the wall;
  Troy nods from high, and totters to her fall.
  Enough is paid to Priam's royal name,
  More than enough to duty and to fame.
  If by a mortal hand my father's throne
  Could be defended, 'twas by mine alone.
  Now Troy to thee commends her future state,
  And gives her gods companions of thy fate:
  From their assistance, happier walls expect,
  Which, wandering long, at last thou shalt erect."
  He said, and brought me, from their blest abodes,
  The venerable statues of the gods,
  With ancient Vesta from the sacred choir,
  The wreaths and reliques of the immortal fire.
    Now peals of shouts come thundering from afar,
  Cries, threats, and loud laments, and mingled war:
  The noise approaches, though our palace stood
  Aloof from streets, encompassed with a wood.
  Louder, and yet more loud, I hear the alarms
  Of human cries distinct, and clashing arms.
  Fear broke my slumbers; I no longer stay,                   }
  But mount the terrace, thence the town survey,              }
  And hearken what the frightful sounds convey.               }
  Thus, when a flood of fire by wind is borne,
  Crackling it rolls, and mows the standing corn;
  Or deluges, descending on the plains,                       }
  Sweep o'er the yellow year, destroy the pains               }
  Of labouring oxen, and the peasant's gains;                 }
  Unroot the forest oaks, and bear away
  Flocks, folds, and trees, an undistinguished prey--
  The shepherd climbs the cliff, and sees from far
  The wasteful ravage of the watery war.
  Then Hector's faith was manifestly cleared,
  And Grecian frauds in open light appeared.
  The palace of Deïphobus ascends
  In smoky flames, and catches on his friends.
  Ucalegon burns next: the seas are bright
  With splendour not their own, and shine with Trojan light.
  New clamours and new clangors now arise,
  The sound of trumpets mixed with fighting cries.
  With phrensy seized, I run to meet the alarms,
  Resolved on death, resolved to die in arms,
  But first to gather friends, with them to oppose
  (If Fortune favoured) and repel the foes;
  Spurred by my courage, by my country fired,
  With sense of honour and revenge inspired.
    Panthûs, Apollo's priest, a sacred name,
  Had 'scaped the Grecian swords, and passed the flame:
  With reliques loaden, to my doors he fled,
  And by the hand his tender grandson led.
  "What hope, O Panthûs? whither can we run?
  Where make a stand? and what may yet be done?"
  Scarce had I said, when Panthûs, with a groan,--
  "Troy is no more, and Ilium was a town!
  The fatal day, the appointed hour, is come,
  When wrathful Jove's irrevocable doom
  Transfers the Trojan state to Grecian hands.
  The fire consumes the town, the foe commands;
  And armed hosts, an unexpected force,
  Break from the bowels of the fatal horse.
  Within the gates, proud Sinon throws about
  The flames; and foes, for entrance, press without,
  With thousand others, whom I fear to name,
  More than from Argos or Mycenæ came.
  To several posts their parties they divide;
  Some block the narrow streets, some scour the wide:
  The bold they kill, the unwary they surprise;
  Who fights finds death, and death finds him who flies.
  The warders of the gate but scarce maintain
  The unequal combat, and resist in vain."
    I heard; and heaven, that well-born souls inspires,
  Prompts me, through lifted swords and rising fires,
  To run, where clashing arms and clamour calls,
  And rush undaunted to defend the walls.
  Ripheus and Iphitus by my side engage,
  For valour one renowned, and one for age.
  Dymas and Hypanis by moonlight knew
  My motions and my mien, and to my party drew;
  With young Chorœbus, who by love was led
  To win renown, and fair Cassandra's bed;
  And lately brought his troops to Priam's aid,
  Forewarned in vain by the prophetic maid:
  Whom when I saw resolved in arms to fall,
  And that one spirit animated all,
  "Brave souls!" said I,--"but brave, alas! in vain--
  Come, finish what our cruel fates ordain.
  You see the desperate state of our affairs,
  And heaven's protecting powers are deaf to prayers.
  The passive gods behold the Greeks defile
  Their temples, and abandon to the spoil
  Their own abodes: we, feeble few, conspire
  To save a sinking town, involved in fire.
  Then let us fall, but fall amidst our foes:
  Despair of life the means of living shows."
  So bold a speech encouraged their desire
  Of death, and added fuel to their fire.
    As hungry wolves, with raging appetite,
  Scour through the fields, nor fear the stormy night--
  Their whelps at home expect the promised food,
  And long to temper their dry chaps in blood--
  So rushed we forth at once: resolved to die,
  Resolved, in death, the last extremes to try,
  We leave the narrow lanes behind, and dare                  }
  The unequal combat in the public square:                    }
  Night was our friend; our leader was despair.               }
  What tongue can tell the slaughter of that night?
  What eyes can weep the sorrows and affright?
  An ancient and imperial city falls;
  The streets are filled with frequent funerals;
  Houses and holy temples float in blood,
  And hostile nations make a common flood.
  Not only Trojans fall; but, in their turn,
  The vanquished triumph, and the victors mourn.
  Ours take new courage from despair and night;
  Confused the fortune is, confused the fight.
  All parts resound with tumults, plaints, and fears;
  And grisly Death in sundry shapes appears.
  Androgeos fell among us, with his band,
  Who thought us Grecians newly come to land.
  "From whence," said he, "my friends, this long delay?
  You loiter, while the spoils are borne away:
  Our ships are laden with the Trojan store;
  And you, like truants, come too late ashore."
  He said, but soon corrected his mistake,
  Found, by the doubtful answers which we make.
  Amazed, he would have shunned the unequal fight;
  But we, more numerous, intercept his flight.
  As when some peasant in a bushy brake,
  Has with unwary footing pressed a snake;
  He starts aside, astonished, when he spies                  }
  His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes;              }
  So, from our arms, surprised Androgeos flies--              }
  In vain; for him and his we compass round,                }
  Possessed with fear, unknowing of the ground,             }
  And of their lives an easy conquest found.                }
  Thus Fortune on our first endeavour smiled.
  Chorœbus then, with youthful hopes beguiled,
  Swoln with success, and of a daring mind,
  This new invention fatally designed.
  "My friends," said he, "since Fortune shows the way,
  'Tis fit we should the auspicious guide obey.
  For what has she these Grecian arms bestowed,
  But their destruction, and the Trojans' good?
  Then change we shields, and their devices bear:
  Let fraud supply the want of force in war.
  They find us arms." This said, himself he dressed           }
  In dead Androgeos' spoils, his upper vest,                  }
  His painted buckler, and his plumy crest.                   }
  Thus Ripheus, Dymas, all the Trojan train,
  Lay down their own attire, and strip the slain.
  Mixed with the Greeks, we go with ill presage,
  Flattered with hopes to glut our greedy rage;
  Unknown, assaulting whom we blindly meet,
  And strew, with Grecian carcases, the street.
  Thus while their straggling parties we defeat,
  Some to the shore and safer ships retreat;
  And some, oppressed with more ignoble fear,
  Remount the hollow horse, and pant in secret there.
    But, ah! what use of valour can be made,
  When heaven's propitious powers refuse their aid?
  Behold the royal prophetess, the fair
  Cassandra, dragged by her dishevelled hair,
  Whom not Minerva's shrine, nor sacred bands,
  In safety could protect from sacrilegious hands:
  On heaven she cast her eyes, she sighed, she cried--
  'Twas all she could--her tender arms were tied.
  So sad a sight Chorœbus could not bear;
  But, fired with rage, distracted with despair,
  Amid the barbarous ravishers he flew.
  Our leader's rash example we pursue:
  But storms of stones, from the proud temple's height,
  Pour down, and on our battered helms alight:
  We from our friends received this fatal blow,
  Who thought us Grecians, as we seemed in show.
  They aim at the mistaken crests, from high;
  And ours beneath the ponderous ruin lie.
  Then, moved with anger and disdain, to see
  Their troops dispersed, the royal virgin free,
  The Grecians rally, and their powers unite,
  With fury charge us, and renew the fight.
  The brother kings with Ajax join their force,
  And the whole squadron of Thessalian horse.
    Thus, when the rival winds their quarrel try,
  Contending for the kingdom of the sky,
  South, east, and west, on airy coursers borne--
  The whirlwind gathers, and the woods are torn:
  Then Nereus strikes the deep: the billows rise,
  And, mixed with ooze and sand, pollute the skies.
  The troops we squandered first, again appear
  From several quarters, and inclose the rear.
  They first observe, and to the rest betray,
  Our different speech; our borrowed arms survey.
  Oppressed with odds, we fall; Chorœbus first,
  At Pallas' altar, by Peneleus pierced.
  Then Ripheus followed, in the unequal fight;
  Just of his word, observant of the right:
  Heaven thought not so. Dymas their fate attends,
  With Hypanis, mistaken by their friends.
  Nor, Panthûs, thee thy mitre, nor the bands
  Of awful Phœbus, saved from impious hands.
  Ye Trojan flames! your testimony bear,
  What I performed, and what I suffered there;
  No sword avoiding in the fatal strife,
  Exposed to death, and prodigal of life.
  Witness, ye heavens! I live not by my fault:
  I strove to have deserved the death I sought.
  But, when I could not fight, and would have died,
  Borne off to distance by the growing tide,
  Old Iphitus and I were hurried thence,
  With Pelias wounded, and without defence.
  New clamours from the invested palace ring:
  We run to die, or disengage the king.
  So hot the assault, so high the tumult rose,
  While ours defend, and while the Greeks oppose,
  As all the Dardan and Argolic race
  Had been contracted in that narrow space;
  Or as all Ilium else were void of fear,
  And tumult, war, and slaughter, only there.
  Their targets in a tortoise cast, the foes,
  Secure advancing, to the turrets rose:
  Some mount the scaling-ladders; some, more bold,
  Swerve upwards, and by posts and pillars hold:
  Their left hand gripes their bucklers in the ascent,
  While with the right they seize the battlement.
  From the demolished towers, the Trojans throw
  Huge heaps of stones, that, falling, crush the foe:
  And heavy beams and rafters from the sides,
  (Such arms their last necessity provides!)
  And gilded roofs, come tumbling from on high,
  The marks of state, and ancient royalty.
  The guards below, fixed in the pass, attend
  The charge undaunted, and the gate defend.
  Renewed in courage with recovered breath,
  A second time we ran to tempt our death,
  To clear the palace from the foe, succeed
  The weary living, and revenge the dead.
    A postern-door, yet unobserved and free,
  Joined by the length of a blind gallery,
  To the king's closet led--a way well known
  To Hector's wife, while Priam held the throne--
  Through which she brought Astyanax, unseen,
  To cheer his grandsire, and his grandsire's queen.
  Through this we pass, and mount the tower, from whence
  With unavailing arms the Trojans make defence.
  From this the trembling king had oft descried
  The Grecian camp, and saw their navy ride.
  Beams from its lofty height with swords we hew,
  Then, wrenching with our hands, the assault renew;
  And, where the rafters on the columns meet,
  We push them headlong with our arms and feet.
  The lightning flies not swifter than the fall,
  Nor thunder louder than the ruined wall:
  Down goes the top at once; the Greeks beneath
  Are piecemeal torn, or pounded into death.
  Yet more succeed, and more to death are sent:
  We cease not from above, nor they below relent.
  Before the gate stood Pyrrhus, threatening loud,
  With glittering arms conspicuous in the crowd.
  So shines, renewed in youth, the crested snake,
  Who slept the winter in a thorny brake,
  And, casting off his slough when spring returns,
  Now looks aloft, and with new glory burns,
  Restored with poisonous herbs; his ardent sides
  Reflect the sun; and, raised on spires, he rides
  High o'er the grass: hissing he rolls along,
  And brandishes by fits his forky tongue.
  Proud Periphas, and fierce Automedon,
  His father's charioteer, together run
  To force the gate: the Scyrian infantry
  Rush on in crowds, and the barred passage free.
  Entering the court, with shouts the skies they rend;
  And flaming firebrands to the roofs ascend.
  Himself, among the foremost, deals his blows,
  And with his axe repeated strokes bestows
  On the strong doors; then all their shoulders ply,
  Till from the posts the brazen hinges fly.
  He hews apace: the double bars at length
  Yield to his axe, and unresisted strength.
  A mighty breach is made: the rooms concealed
  Appear, and all the palace is revealed--
  The halls of audience, and of public state,
  And where the lonely queen in secret sate.
  Armed soldiers now by trembling maids are seen,
  With not a door, and scarce a space, between.
  The house is filled with loud laments and cries,
  And shrieks of women rend the vaulted skies.
  The fearful matrons run from place to place,
  And kiss the thresholds, and the posts embrace.
  The fatal work inhuman Pyrrhus plies,
  And all his father sparkles in his eyes.
  Nor bars, nor fighting guards, his force sustain:
  The bars are broken, and the guards are slain.
  In rush the Greeks, and all the apartments fill;
  Those few defendants whom they find, they kill.
  Not with so fierce a rage the foaming flood
  Roars, when he finds his rapid course withstood;
  Bears down the dams with unresisted sway,
  And sweeps the cattle and the cots away.
  These eyes beheld him, when he marched between
  The brother kings: I saw the unhappy queen,
  The hundred wives, and where old Priam stood,
  To stain his hallowed altar with his blood.
  The fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,
  So large a promise, of a progeny,)
  The posts of plated gold, and hung with spoils,
  Fell the reward of the proud victor's toils.
  Where'er the raging fire had left a space,
  The Grecians enter, and possess the place.
    Perhaps you may of Priam's fate inquire.
  He--when he saw his regal town on fire,
  His ruined palace, and his entering foes,
  On every side inevitable woes--
  In arms disused, invests his limbs, decayed,
  Like them, with age; a late and useless aid.
  His feeble shoulders scarce the weight sustain;             }
  Loaded, not armed, he creeps along with pain,               }
  Despairing of success, ambitious to be slain!               }
  Uncovered but by heaven, there stood in view
  An altar: near the hearth a laurel grew,
  Dodder'd with age, whose boughs encompass round
  The household gods, and shade the holy ground.
  Here Hecuba, with all her helpless train
  Of dames, for shelter sought, but sought in vain.
  Driven like a flock of doves along the sky,
  Their images they hug, and to their altars fly.
  The queen, when she beheld her trembling lord,
  And hanging by his side a heavy sword,
  "What rage," she cried, "has seized my husband's mind?
  What arms are these, and to what use designed?
  These times want other aids! Were Hector here,
  Even Hector now in vain, like Priam, would appear.
  With us, one common shelter thou shalt find,
  Or in one common fate with us be joined."
  She said, and with a last salute embraced
  The poor old man, and by the laurel placed.
  Behold! Polites, one of Priam's sons,
  Pursued by Pyrrhus, there for safety runs.
  Through swords and foes, amazed and hurt, he flies
  Through empty courts, and open galleries.
  Him Pyrrhus, urging with his lance, pursues,
  And often reaches, and his thrusts renews.
  The youth transfixed, with lamentable cries,
  Expires before his wretched parents' eyes:
  Whom gasping at his feet when Priam saw,
  The fear of death gave place to nature's law;
  And, shaking more with anger than with age,
  "The gods," said he, "requite thy brutal rage!
  As sure they will, barbarian, sure they must,
  If there be gods in heaven, and gods be just--
  Who tak'st in wrongs an insolent delight;
  With a son's death to infect a father's sight.
  Not he, whom thou and lying fame conspire
  To call thee his--not he, thy vaunted sire,
  Thus used my wretched age: the gods he feared,
  The laws of nature and of nations heard.
  He cheered my sorrows, and, for sums of gold,
  The bloodless carcase of my Hector sold;
  Pitied the woes a parent underwent,
  And sent me back in safety from his tent."
    This said, his feeble hand a javelin threw,
  Which, fluttering, seemed to loiter as it flew:
  Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
  And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield.
    Then Pyrrhus thus: "Go thou from me to fate,
  And to my father my foul deeds relate.
  Now die!"--With that he dragged the trembling sire,
  Sliddering through clottered blood and holy mire,
  (The mingled paste his murdered son had made,)              }
  Hauled from beneath the violated shade,                     }
  And on the sacred pile the royal victim laid.               }
  His right hand held his bloody faulchion bare,
  His left he twisted in his hoary hair;
  Then, with a speeding thrust, his heart he found;           }
  The lukewarm blood came rushing through the wound,          }
  And sanguine streams distained the sacred ground.           }
  Thus Priam fell, and shared one common fate
  With Troy in ashes, and his ruined state--
  He, who the sceptre of all Asia swayed,
  Whom monarchs like domestic slaves obeyed.
  On the bleak shore now lies the abandoned king,
  A headless carcase, and a nameless thing.
    Then, not before, I felt my cruddled blood
  Congeal with fear, my hair with horror stood:
  My father's image filled my pious mind,
  Lest equal years might equal fortune find.
  Again I thought on my forsaken wife,
  And trembled for my son's abandoned life.
  I looked about, but found myself alone,
  Deserted at my need! My friends were gone.
  Some spent with toil, some with despair oppressed,
  Leaped headlong from the heights; the flames consumed the rest.
  Thus wandering in my way without a guide,
  The graceless Helen in the porch I spied
  Of Vesta's temple; there she lurked alone;
  Muffled she sate, and, what she could, unknown:
  But, by the flames that cast their blaze around,
  That common bane of Greece and Troy I found.
  For Ilium burnt, she dreads the Trojan sword;               }
  More dreads the vengeance of her injured lord;              }
  Even by those gods, who refuged her, abhorred.              }
  Trembling with rage, the strumpet I regard,
  Resolved to give her guilt the due reward.
  "Shall she triumphant sail before the wind,
  And leave in flames unhappy Troy behind?
  Shall she her kingdom and her friends review,
  In state attended with a captive crew,
  While unrevenged the good old Priam falls,
  And Grecian fires consume the Trojan walls?
  For this the Phrygian fields and Xanthian flood
  Were swelled with bodies, and were drunk with blood?
  'Tis true, a soldier can small honour gain,
  And boast no conquest, from a woman slain:
  Yet shall the fact not pass without applause,
  Of vengeance taken in so just a cause.
  The punished crime shall set my soul at ease,
  And murmuring manes of my friends appease."
  Thus while I rave, a gleam of pleasing light                }
  Spread o'er the place; and, shining heavenly bright,        }
  My mother stood revealed before my sight--                  }
  Never so radiant did her eyes appear;
  Not her own star confessed a light so clear--
  Great in her charms, as when on gods above
  She looks, and breathes herself into their love.
  She held my hand, the destined blow to break;
  Then from her rosy lips began to speak:--
  "My son! from whence this madness, this neglect
  Of my commands, and those whom I protect?
  Why this unmanly rage? Recall to mind
  Whom you forsake, what pledges leave behind.
  Look if your helpless father yet survive,
  Or if Ascanius or Creüsa live.
  Around your house the greedy Grecians err;                  }
  And these had perished in the nightly war,                  }
  But for my presence and protecting care.                    }
  Not Helen's face, nor Paris, was in fault;
  But by the gods was this destruction brought.
  Now cast your eyes around, while I dissolve
  The mists and films that mortal eyes involve,
  Purge from your sight the dross, and make you see
  The shape of each avenging deity.
  Enlightened thus, my just commands fulfil,
  Nor fear obedience to your mother's will.
  Where yon disordered heap of ruin lies,
  Stones rent from stones,--where clouds of dust arise,--
  Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place,                 }
  Below the wall's foundation drives his mace,                }
  And heaves the building from the solid base.                }
  Look, where, in arms, imperial Juno stands                }
  Full in the Scæan gate, with loud commands,               }
  Urging on shore the tardy Grecian bands.                  }
  See! Pallas, of her snaky buckler proud,
  Bestrides the tower, refulgent through the cloud:
  See! Jove new courage to the foe supplies,
  And arms against the town the partial deities.
  Haste hence, my son! this fruitless labour end:             }
  Haste, where your trembling spouse and sire attend:         }
  Haste! and a mother's care your passage shall befriend."    }
  She said, and swiftly vanished from my sight,
  Obscure in clouds, and gloomy shades of night.
  I looked, I listened; dreadful sounds I hear;
  And the dire forms of hostile gods appear.
  Troy sunk in flames I saw, (nor could prevent,)
  And Ilium from its old foundations rent--
  Rent like a mountain-ash, which dared the winds,
  And stood the sturdy strokes of labouring hinds.
  About the roots the cruel axe resounds;
  The stumps are pierced with oft-repeated wounds:
  The war is felt on high; the nodding crown
  Now threats a fall, and throws the leafy honours down.
  To their united force it yields, though late,
  And mourns with mortal groans the approaching fate:
  The roots no more their upper load sustain;
  But down she falls, and spreads a ruin through the plain.
    Descending thence, I 'scape through foes and fire:
  Before the goddess, foes and flames retire.
  Arrived at home, he, for whose only sake,
  Or most for his, such toils I undertake--
  The good Anchises--whom, by timely flight,
  I purposed to secure on Ida's height--
  Refused the journey, resolute to die,
  And add his funerals to the fate of Troy,
  Rather than exile and old age sustain.
  "Go you, whose blood runs warm in every vein.
  Had heaven decreed, that I should life enjoy,
  Heaven had decreed to save unhappy Troy.
  'Tis, sure, enough, if not too much, for one,
  Twice to have seen our Ilium overthrown.
  Make haste to save the poor remaining crew,
  And give this useless corpse a long adieu.
  These weak old hands suffice to stop my breath;
  At least the pitying foes will aid my death,
  To take my spoils, and leave my body bare:
  As for my sepulchre, let heaven take care.
  'Tis long since I, for my celestial wife,
  Loathed by the gods, have dragged a lingering life;
  Since every hour and moment I expire,
  Blasted from heaven by Jove's avenging fire."
  This oft repeated, he stood fixed to die:                   }
  Myself, my wife, my son, my family,                         }
  Entreat, pray, beg, and raise a doleful cry--               }
  "What! will he still persist, on death resolve,
  And in his ruin all his house involve?"
  He still persists his reasons to maintain;
  Our prayers, our tears, our loud laments, are vain.
    Urged by despair, again I go to try
  The fate of arms, resolved in fight to die.
  What hope remains, but what my death must give?
  "Can I, without so dear a father, live?
  You term it prudence, what I baseness call:
  Could such a word from such a parent fall?
  If Fortune please, and so the gods ordain,                  }
  That nothing should of ruined Troy remain,                  }
  And you conspire with Fortune to be slain;                  }
  The way to death is wide, the approaches near:
  For soon relentless Pyrrhus will appear,
  Reeking with Priam's blood--the wretch who slew             }
  The son (inhuman) in the father's view,                     }
  And then the sire himself to the dire altar drew.           }
  O goddess mother! give me back to Fate;
  Your gift was undesired, and came too late.
  Did you, for this, unhappy me convey
  Through foes and fires, to see my house a prey?
  Shall I my father, wife, and son, behold,
  Weltering in blood, each other's arms infold?
  Haste! gird my sword, though spent, and overcome:
  'Tis the last summons to receive our doom.
  I hear thee, Fate! and I obey thy call!
  Not unrevenged the foe shall see me fall.
  Restore me to the yet unfinished fight:
  My death is wanting to conclude the night."
  Armed once again, my glittering sword I wield,              }
  While the other hand sustains my weighty shield,            }
  And forth I rush to seek the abandoned field.               }
  I went; but sad Creüsa stopped my way,
  And 'cross the threshold in my passage lay,
  Embraced my knees, and, when I would have gone,
  Shewed me my feeble sire, and tender son.
  "If death be your design--at least," said she,
  "Take us along to share your destiny.
  If any farther hopes in arms remain,
  This place, these pledges of your love, maintain.
  To whom do you expose your father's life,
  Your son's, and mine, your now forgotten wife?"
  While thus she fills the house with clamorous cries,
  Our hearing is diverted by our eyes:
  For, while I held my son, in the short space
  Betwixt our kisses and our last embrace,
  (Strange to relate!) from young Iülus' head                 }
  A lambent flame arose, which gently spread                  }
  Around his brows, and on his temples fed.                   }
  Amazed, with running water we prepare
  To quench the sacred fire, and slake his hair;
  But old Anchises, versed in omens, reared
  His hands to heaven, and this request preferred:--
  "If any vows, almighty Jove, can bend                       }
  Thy will--if piety can prayers commend--                    }
  Confirm the glad presage which thou art pleased to send."   }
  Scarce had he said, when, on our left, we hear
  A peal of rattling thunder roll in air:
  There shot a streaming lamp along the sky,
  Which on the winged lightning seemed to fly:
  From o'er the roof the blaze began to move,
  And, trailing, vanished in the Idæan grove.
  It swept a path in heaven, and shone a guide,
  Then in a steaming stench of sulphur died.
    The good old man with suppliant hands implored
  The gods' protection, and their star adored.
  "Now, now," said he, "my son, no more delay!
  I yield, I follow where heaven shews the way.
  Keep (O my country gods!) our dwelling-place,
  And guard this relique of the Trojan race,
  This tender child!--These omens are your own,
  And you can yet restore the ruined town.
  At least accomplish what your signs foreshow:
  I stand resigned, and am prepared to go."
    He said.--The crackling flames appear on high,
  And driving sparkles dance along the sky.
  With Vulcan's rage the rising winds conspire,
  And near our palace roll the flood of fire.
  "Haste, my dear father! ('tis no time to wait,)
  And load my shoulders with a willing freight.
  Whate'er befalls, your life shall be my care;
  One death, or one deliverance, we will share.
  My hand shall lead our little son; and you,
  My faithful consort, shall our steps pursue.
  Next you, my servants, heed my strict commands:
  Without the walls a ruined temple stands,
  To Ceres hallowed once; a cypress nigh
  Shoots up her venerable head on high,
  By long religion kept; there bend your feet,
  And in divided parties let us meet.
  Our country gods, the reliques, and the bands,
  Hold you, my father, in your guiltless hands:
  In me 'tis impious holy things to bear,
  Red as I am with slaughter, new from war,
  Till in some living stream I cleanse the guilt
  Of dire debate, and blood in battle spilt."
  Thus ordering all that prudence could provide,
  I clothe my shoulders with a lion's hide,
  And yellow spoils; then, on my bending back,
  The welcome load of my dear father take;
  While on my better hand Ascanius hung,
  And with unequal paces tript along.
  Creüsa kept behind: by choice we stray
  Through every dark and every devious way.
  I, who so bold and dauntless, just before,
  The Grecian darts and shock of lances bore,
  At every shadow now am seized with fear,
  Not for myself, but for the charge I bear;
  Till, near the ruined gate arrived at last,
  Secure, and deeming all the danger past,
  A frightful noise of trampling feet we hear.
  My father, looking through the shades with fear,
  Cried out,--"Haste, haste, my son! the foes are nigh;
  Their swords and shining armour I descry."
  Some hostile god, for some unknown offence,
  Had sure bereft my mind of better sense;
  For, while through winding ways I took my flight,
  And sought the shelter of the gloomy night,
  Alas! I lost Creüsa: hard to tell
  If by her fatal destiny she fell,
  Or weary sate, or wandered with affright;
  But she was lost for ever to my sight.
  I knew not, or reflected, till I meet
  My friends, at Ceres' now deserted seat.
  We met: not one was wanting; only she
  Deceived her friends, her son, and wretched me.
  What mad expressions did my tongue refuse?
  Whom did I not, of gods or men, accuse?
  This was the fatal blow, that pained me more
  Than all I felt from ruined Troy before.
  Stung with my loss, and raving with despair,
  Abandoning my now forgotten care,
  Of counsel, comfort, and of hope, bereft,
  My sire, my son, my country gods, I left.
  In shining armour once again I sheath
  My limbs, not feeling wounds, nor fearing death.
  Then headlong to the burning walls I run,
  And seek the danger I was forced to shun.
  I tread my former tracks, through night explore,
  Each passage, every street I crossed before.
  All things were full of horror and affright,
  And dreadful even the silence of the night.
  Then to my father's house I make repair,
  With some small glimpse of hope to find her there.
  Instead of her, the cruel Greeks I met:
  The house was filled with foes, with flames beset.
  Driven on the wings of winds, whole sheets of fire,
  Through air transported, to the roofs aspire.
  From thence to Priam's palace I resort,
  And search the citadel, and desert court.
  Then, unobserved, I pass by Juno's church:
  A guard of Grecians had possessed the porch;
  There Phœnix and Ulysses watch the prey,
  And thither all the wealth of Troy convey--
  The spoils which they from ransacked houses brought,
  And golden bowls from burning altars caught,
  The tables of the gods, the purple vests,
  The people's treasure, and the pomp of priests.
  A rank of wretched youths, with pinioned hands,
  And captive matrons, in long order stands.
  Then, with ungoverned madness, I proclaim,
  Through all the silent streets, Creüsa's name:
  Creüsa still I call; at length she hears,
  And sudden, through the shades of night, appears--
  Appears, no more Creüsa, nor my wife,
  But a pale spectre, larger than the life.
  Aghast, astonished, and struck dumb with fear,
  I stood; like bristles rose my stiffened hair.
  Then thus the ghost began to sooth my grief:--
  "Nor tears, nor cries, can give the dead relief.
  Desist, my much-loved lord, to indulge your pain;
  You bear no more than what the gods ordain.
  My fates permit me not from hence to fly;
  Nor he, the great controller of the sky.
  Long wandering ways for you the powers decree--
  On land hard labours, and a length of sea.
  Then, after many painful years are past,
  On Latium's happy shore you shall be cast,
  Where gentle Tyber from his bed beholds
  The flowery meadows, and the feeding folds.
  There end your toils; and there your fates provide
  A quiet kingdom, and a royal bride:
  There Fortune shall the Trojan line restore,
  And you for lost Creüsa weep no more.
  Fear not that I shall watch, with servile shame,
  The imperious looks of some proud Grecian dame,
  Or, stooping to the victor's lust, disgrace
  My goddess mother, or my royal race.
  And now, farewell! the parent of the gods
  Restrains my fleeting soul in her abodes.
  I trust our common issue to your care."
  She said, and gliding passed unseen in air.
  I strove to speak: but horror tied my tongue;               }
  And thrice about her neck my arms I flung,                  }
  And, thrice deceived, on vain embraces hung.                }
  Light as an empty dream at break of day,
  Or as a blast of wind, she rushed away.
    Thus having passed the night in fruitless pain,
  I to my longing friends return again--
  Amazed the augmented number to behold,
  Of men and matrons mixed, of young and old--
  A wretched exiled crew together brought,
  With arms appointed, and with treasure fraught,
  Resolved, and willing, under my command,
  To run all hazards both of sea and land.
  The Morn began, from Ida, to display
  Her rosy cheeks; and Phosphor led the day:
  Before the gates the Grecians took their post,
  And all pretence of late relief was lost.
  I yield to Fate, unwillingly retire,
  And, loaded, up the hill convey my sire.


FOOTNOTES:

[100] The destruction of Veii is here shadowed under that of
Troy. Livy, in his description of it, seems to have emulated in his
prose, and almost equalled, the beauty of Virgil's verse.--DRYDEN.




ÆNEÏS.




BOOK III.

ARGUMENT.

 _Æneas proceeds in his relation: he gives an account of the fleet
 with which he sailed, and the success of his first voyage to Thrace.
 From thence he directs his course to Delos, and asks the oracle what
 place the gods had appointed for his habitation? By a mistake of the
 oracle's answer, he settles in Crete. His household gods give him the
 true sense of the oracle, in a dream. He follows their advice, and
 makes the best of his way for Italy. He is cast on several shores,
 and meets with very surprising adventures, till at length he lands
 on Sicily, where his father Anchises dies. This is the place which
 he was sailing from, when the tempest rose, and threw him upon the
 Carthaginian coast._

  When heaven had overturned the Trojan state,
  And Priam's throne, by too severe a fate;
  When ruined Troy became the Grecians' prey,
  And Ilium's lofty towers in ashes lay;
  Warned by celestial omens, we retreat,
  To seek in foreign lands a happier seat.
  Near old Antandros, and at Ida's foot,
  The timber of the sacred groves we cut,
  And build our fleet--uncertain yet to find
  What place the gods for our repose assigned.
  Friends daily flock; and scarce the kindly spring
  Began to clothe the ground, and birds to sing,
  When old Anchises summoned all to sea:
  The crew my father and the Fates obey.
  With sighs and tears I leave my native shore,
  And empty fields, where Ilium stood before.
  My sire, my son, our less and greater gods,
  All sail at once, and cleave the briny floods.
    Against our coast appears a spacious land,
  Which once the fierce Lycurgus did command,
  (Thracia the name--the people bold in war--
  Vast are their fields, and tillage is their care,)
  A hospitable realm while Fate was kind,
  With Troy in friendship and religion joined.
  I land, with luckless omens; then adore
  Their gods, and draw a line along the shore:
  I lay the deep foundations of a wall,
  And Ænos, named from me, the city call.
  To Dionæan Venus vows are paid,                             }
  And all the powers that rising labours aid;                 }
  A bull on Jove's imperial altar laid.                       }
  Not far, a rising hillock stood in view;
  Sharp myrtles, on the sides, and cornels grew.
  There, while I went to crop the sylvan scenes,
  And shade our altar with their leafy greens,
  I pulled a plant--with horror I relate
  A prodigy so strange, and full of fate--
  The rooted fibres rose; and, from the wound,
  Black bloody drops distilled upon the ground.
  Mute and amazed, my hair with terror stood;
  Fear shrunk my sinews, and congealed my blood.
  Manned once again, another plant I try:
  That other gushed with the same sanguine die.
  Then, fearing guilt for some offence unknown,
  With prayers and vows the Dryads I atone,
  With all the sisters of the woods, and most
  The god of arms, who rules the Thracian coast--
  That they, or he, these omens would avert,
  Release our fears, and better signs impart.
  Cleared, as I thought, and fully fixed at length
  To learn the cause, I tugged with all my strength:
  I bent my knees against the ground: once more
  The violated myrtle ran with gore.
  Scarce dare I tell the sequel: from the womb
  Of wounded earth, and caverns of the tomb,
  A groan, as of a troubled ghost, renewed
  My fright, and then these dreadful words ensued:--
  "Why dost thou thus my buried body rend?
  O! spare the corpse of thy unhappy friend!
  Spare to pollute thy pious hands with blood:
  The tears distil not from the wounded wood;
  But every drop this living tree contains,
  Is kindred blood, and ran in Trojan veins.
  O! fly from this inhospitable shore,
  Warned by my fate; for I am Polydore!
  Here loads of lances, in my blood embrued,
  Again shoot upward, by my blood renewed."
    My faultering tongue and shivering limbs declare
  My horror, and in bristles rose my hair.
  When Troy with Grecian arms was closely pent,               }
  Old Priam, fearful of the war's event,                      }
  This hapless Polydore to Thracia sent:                      }
  Loaded with gold, he sent his darling, far                }
  From noise and tumults, and destructive war,              }
  Committed to the faithless tyrant's care;                 }
  Who, when he saw the power of Troy decline,
  Forsook the weaker with the strong to join--
  Broke every bond of nature and of truth,
  And murdered, for his wealth, the royal youth.
  O sacred hunger of pernicious gold!
  What bands of faith can impious lucre hold?
  Now, when my soul had shaken off her fears,
  I call my father, and the Trojan peers--
  Relate the prodigies of heaven--require
  What he commands, and their advice desire.
  All vote to leave that execrable shore,
  Polluted with the blood of Polydore;
  But, ere we sail, his funeral rites prepare,
  Then, to his ghost, a tomb and altars rear.
  In mournful pomp the matrons walk the round,                }
  With baleful cypress and blue fillets crowned,              }
  With eyes dejected, and with hair unbound.                  }
  Then bowls of tepid milk and blood we pour,
  And thrice invoke the soul of Polydore.
    Now, when the raging storms no longer reign,
  But southern gales invite us to the main,
  We launch our vessels, with a prosperous wind,
  And leave the cities and the shores behind.
    An island in the Ægæan main appears:
  Neptune and watery Doris claim it theirs.
  It floated once, till Phœbus fixed the sides
  To rooted earth, and now it braves the tides.
  Here, borne by friendly winds, we come ashore,              }
  With needful ease our weary limbs restore,                  }
  And the Sun's temple and his town adore.                    }
    Anius, the priest and king, with laurel crowned,
  His hoary locks with purple fillets bound,
  Who saw my sire the Delian shore ascend,
  Came forth with eager haste to meet his friend;
  Invites him to his palace; and, in sign
  Of ancient love, their plighted hands they join.
  Then to the temple of the god I went,
  And thus, before the shrine, my vows present:--
  "Give, O Thymbræus! give a resting place
  To the sad reliques of the Trojan race;
  A seat secure, a region of their own,
  A lasting empire, and a happier town.
  Where shall we fix? where shall our labours end?
  Whom shall we follow, and what fate attend?
  Let not my prayers a doubtful answer find;
  But in clear auguries unveil thy mind."
  Scarce had I said: he shook the holy ground,                }
  The laurels, and the lofty hills around;                    }
  And from the tripos rushed a bellowing sound.               }
  Prostrate we fell; confessed the present god,
  Who gave this answer from his dark abode:--
  "Undaunted youths! go, seek that mother earth
  From which your ancestors derive their birth.
  The soil that sent you forth, her ancient race,
  In her old bosom, shall again embrace.
  Through the wide world the Æneian house shall reign,
  And children's children shall the crown sustain."
  Thus Phœbus did our future fates disclose:
  A mighty tumult, mixed with joy, arose.
  All are concerned to know what place the god
  Assigned, and where determined our abode.
  My father, long revolving in his mind
  The race and lineage of the Trojan kind,
  Thus answered their demands:--"Ye princes, hear
  Your pleasing fortune, and dispel your fear.
  The fruitful isle of Crete, well known to fame,
  Sacred of old to Jove's imperial name,
  In the mid ocean lies, with large command,
  And on its plains a hundred cities stand.
  Another Ida rises there, and we
  From thence derive our Trojan ancestry.
  From thence, as 'tis divulged by certain fame,
  To the Rhœtean shores old Teucer came;
  There fixed, and there the seat of empire chose,
  Ere Ilium and the Trojan towers arose.
  In humble vales they built their soft abodes,               }
  Till Cybele, the mother of the gods,                        }
  With tinkling cymbals charmed the Idæan woods.              }
  She secret rites and ceremonies taught,
  And to the yoke the savage lions brought.
  Let us the land, which heaven appoints, explore;
  Appease the winds, and seek the Gnosian shore.
  If Jove assists the passage of our fleet,
  The third propitious dawn discovers Crete."
  Thus having said, the sacrifices, laid
  On smoking altars, to the gods he paid--
  A bull, to Neptune an oblation due,
  Another bull to bright Apollo, slew--
  A milk-white ewe, the western winds to please,
  And one coal-black, to calm the stormy seas.
  Ere this, a flying rumour had been spread,
  That fierce Idomeneus from Crete was fled,
  Expelled and exiled; that the coast was free
  From foreign or domestic enemy.
  We leave the Delian ports, and put to sea;
  By Naxos, famed for vintage, make our way;
  Then green Donysa pass; and sail in sight
  Of Paros' isle, with marble quarries white.
  We pass the scattered isles of Cyclades,
  That, scarce distinguished, seem to stud the seas.
  The shouts of sailors double near the shores;
  They stretch their canvas, and they ply their oars.
  "All hands aloft! for Crete! for Crete!" they cry,
  And swiftly through the foamy billows fly.
  Full on the promised land at length we bore,
  With joy descending on the Cretan shore.
  With eager haste a rising town I frame,
  Which from the Trojan Pergamus I name:
  The name itself was grateful:--I exhort
  To found their houses, and erect a fort.
  Our ships are hauled upon the yellow strand;
  The youth begin to till the laboured land;
  And I myself new marriages promote,
  Give laws, and dwellings I divide by lot;
  When rising vapours choke the wholesome air,
  And blasts of noisome winds corrupt the year;
  The trees devouring caterpillars burn;
  Parched was the grass, and blighted was the corn:
  Nor 'scape the beasts; for Sirius, from on high,            }
  With pestilential heat infects the sky:                     }
  My men--some fall, the rest in fevers fry.                  }
  Again my father bids me seek the shore
  Of sacred Delos, and the god implore,
  To learn what end of woes we might expect,
  And to what clime our weary course direct.
    'Twas night, when every creature, void of cares,
  The common gift of balmy slumber shares;
  The statues of my gods, (for such they seemed,)
  Those gods whom I from flaming Troy redeemed,
  Before me stood, majestically bright,
  Full in the beams of Phœbe's entering light.
  Then thus they spoke, and eased my troubled mind:
  "What from the Delian god thou goest to find,
  He tells thee here, and sends us to relate.
  Those powers are we, companions of thy fate,
  Who from the burning town by thee were brought,
  Thy fortune followed, and thy safety wrought.
  Through seas and lands as we thy steps attend,
  So shall our care thy glorious race befriend.
  An ample realm for thee thy fates ordain,
  A town, that o'er the conquered world shall reign.
  Thou, mighty walls for mighty nations build;
  Nor let thy weary mind to labours yield:
  But change thy seat; for not the Delian god,
  Nor we, have given thee Crete for our abode.
  A land there is, Hesperia called of old,
  (The soil is fruitful, and the natives bold--
  The Œnotrians held it once,) by later fame
  Now called Italia, from the leader's name.
  Iasius there and Dardanus were born;
  From thence we came, and thither must return.
  Rise, and thy sire with these glad tidings greet.
  Search Italy; for Jove denies thee Crete."
    Astonished at their voices and their sight,
  (Nor were they dreams, but visions of the night;
  I saw, I knew their faces, and descried,
  In perfect view, their hair with fillets tied,)
  I started from my couch; a clammy sweat
  On all my limbs and shivering body sate.
  To heaven I lift my hands with pious haste,
  And sacred incense in the flames I cast.
  Thus to the gods their perfect honours done,
  More cheerful to my good old sire I run,
  And tell the pleasing news. In little space
  He found his error of the double race;
  Not, as before he deemed, derived from Crete;
  No more deluded by the doubtful seat;
  Then said,--"O son, turmoiled in Trojan fate!
  Such things as these Cassandra did relate.
  This day revives within my mind, what she
  Foretold of Troy renewed in Italy,
  And Latian lands; but who could then have thought,          }
  That Phrygian gods to Latium should be brought?             }
  Or who believed what mad Cassandra taught?                  }
  Now let us go, where Phœbus leads the way."
  He said; and we with glad consent obey,
  Forsake the seat, and, leaving few behind,
  We spread our sails before the willing wind.
  Now from the sight of land our galleys move,
  With only seas around, and skies above;
  When o'er our heads descends a burst of rain,
  And night with sable clouds involves the main;
  The ruffling winds the foamy billows raise;
  The scattered fleet is forced to several ways;
  The face of heaven is ravished from our eyes,
  And in redoubled peals the roaring thunder flies.
  Cast from our course, we wander in the dark;
  No stars to guide, no point of land to mark.
  Even Palinurus no distinction found
  Betwixt the night and day; such darkness reigned around.
  Three starless nights the doubtful navy strays,
  Without distinction, and three sunless days;
  The fourth renews the light, and, from our shrouds,
  We view a rising land, like distant clouds;
  The mountain-tops confirm the pleasing sight,
  And curling smoke ascending from their height.
  The canvas falls; their oars the sailors ply;
  From the rude strokes the whirling waters fly.
  At length I land upon the Strophades,
  Safe from the danger of the stormy seas.
  Those isles are compassed by the Ionian main,
  The dire abode where the foul Harpies reign,
  Forced by the winged warriors to repair
  To their old homes, and leave their costly fare.
  Monsters more fierce offended heaven ne'er sent
  From hell's abyss, for human punishment--
  With virgin-faces, but with wombs obscene,                  }
  Foul paunches, and with ordure still unclean;               }
  With claws for hands, and looks for ever lean.              }
    We landed at the port, and soon beheld
  Fat herds of oxen graze the flowery field,
  And wanton goats without a keeper strayed.--
  With weapons we the welcome prey invade,
  Then call the gods for partners of our feast,
  And Jove himself, the chief invited guest.
  We spread the tables on the greensward ground;
  We feed with hunger, and the bowls go round;
  When from the mountain-tops, with hideous cry,
  And clattering wings, the hungry Harpies fly:
  They snatch the meat, defiling all they find,
  And, parting, leave a loathsome stench behind.
  Close by a hollow rock, again we sit,
  New dress the dinner, and the beds refit,
  Secure from sight, beneath a pleasing shade,
  Where tufted trees a native arbour made.
  Again the holy fires on altars burn;
  And once again the ravenous birds return,
  Or from the dark recesses where they lie,
  Or from another quarter of the sky--
  With filthy claws their odious meal repeat,
  And mix their loathsome ordures with their[101] meat.
  I bid my friends for vengeance then prepare,
  And with the hellish nation wage the war.
  They, as commanded, for the fight provide,
  And in the grass their glittering weapons hide;
  Then, when along the crooked shore we hear
  Their clattering wings, and saw the foes appear,
  Misenus sounds a charge: we take the alarm,
  And our strong hands with swords and bucklers arm.
  In this new kind of combat, all employ
  Their utmost force, the monsters to destroy--
  In vain:--the fated skin is proof to wounds;
  And from their plumes the shining sword rebounds.
  At length rebuffed, they leave their mangled prey,
  And their stretched pinions to the skies display.
  Yet one remained--the messenger of Fate,                    }
  High on a craggy cliff Celæno sate,                         }
  And thus her dismal errand did relate:--                    }
  "What! not contented with our oxen slain,                 }
  Dare you with heaven an impious war maintain,             }
  And drive the Harpies from their native reign?            }
  Heed therefore what I say; and keep in mind
  What Jove decrees, what Phœbus has designed,
  And I, the Furies' queen, from both relate--
  You seek the Italian shores, foredoomed by Fate:
  The Italian shores are granted you to find,
  And a safe passage to the port assigned.
  But know, that, ere your promised walls you build,
  My curses shall severely be fulfilled.
  Fierce famine is your lot--for this misdeed,
  Reduced to grind the plates on which you feed."
  She said, and to the neighbouring forest flew.
  Our courage fails us, and our fears renew.
  Hopeless to win by war, to prayers we fall,
  And on the offended Harpies humbly call,
  And (whether gods or birds obscene they were)
  Our vows, for pardon and for peace, prefer.
  But old Anchises, offering sacrifice,
  And lifting up to heaven his hands and eyes,
  Adored the greater gods--"Avert," said he,
  "These omens! render vain this prophecy,
  And from the impending curse a pious people free."
  Thus having said, he bids us put to sea;
  We loose from shore our halsers, and obey,
  And soon with swelling sails pursue our watery way.
  Amidst our course, Zacynthian woods appear;
  And next by rocky Neritos we steer:
  We fly from Ithaca's detested shore,
  And curse the land which dire Ulysses bore.
  At length Leucate's cloudy top appears,
  And the Sun's temple, which the sailor fears.
  Resolved to breathe a while from labour past,}
  Our crooked anchors from the prow we cast, }
  And joyful to the little city haste. }
  Here, safe beyond our hopes, our vows we pay
  To Jove, the guide and patron of our way.
  The customs of our country we pursue,
  And Trojan games on Actian shores renew.
  Our youth their naked limbs besmear with oil,
  And exercise the wrestlers' noble toil--
  Pleased to have sailed so long before the wind,
  And left so many Grecian towns behind.
  The sun had now fulfilled his annual course,
  And Boreas on the seas displayed his force:
  I fixed upon the temple's lofty door
  The brazen shield which vanquished Abas bore;
  The verse beneath my name and action speaks:--
  "These arms Æneas took from conquering Greeks."
  Then I command to weigh; the seamen ply
  Their sweeping oars; the smoking billows fly.
  The sight of high Phæacia soon we lost,
  And skimmed along Epirus' rocky coast.
  Then to Chaonia's port our course we bend,
  And, landed, to Buthrotus' heights ascend.
  Here wondrous things were loudly blazed by Fame--
  How Helenus revived the Trojan name,
  And reigned in Greece; that Priam's captive son
  Succeeded Pyrrhus in his bed and throne;
  And fair Andromache, restored by Fate,
  Once more was happy in a Trojan mate.
  I leave my galleys riding in the port,
  And long to see the new Dardanian court.
  By chance, the mournful queen, before the gate,
  Then solemnized her former husband's fate.
  Green altars, raised of turf, with gifts she crowned,       }
  And sacred priests in order stand around,                   }
  And thrice the name of hapless Hector sound.                }
  The grove itself resembles Ida's wood;
  And Simoïs seemed the well-dissembled flood.
  But when, at nearer distance, she beheld
  My shining armour and my Trojan shield,
  Astonished at the sight, the vital heat
  Forsakes her limbs, her veins no longer beat:
  She faints, she falls, and scarce recovering strength,
  Thus, with a faultering tongue, she speaks at length:
  "Are you alive, O goddess-born?" she said,
  "Or if a ghost, then where is Hector's shade?"
  At this she cast a loud and frightful cry.--
  With broken words I made this brief reply:
  "All of me, that remains, appears in sight;
  I live, if living be to loath the light--
  No phantom; but I drag a wretched life,
  My fate resembling that of Hector's wife.
  What have you suffered since you lost your lord?
  By what strange blessing are you now restored?
  Still are you Hector's? or is Hector fled,
  And his remembrance lost in Pyrrhus' bed?"
  With eyes dejected, in a lowly tone,
  After a modest pause, she thus begun:--
  "Oh only happy maid of Priam's race,
  Whom death delivered from the foe's embrace!
  Commanded on Achilles' tomb to die,                         }
  Not forced, like us, to hard captivity,                     }
  Or in a haughty master's arms to lie.                       }
  In Grecian ships, unhappy we were borne,
  Endured the victor's lust, sustained the scorn:
  Thus I submitted to the lawless pride
  Of Pyrrhus, more a handmaid than a bride.
  Cloyed with possession, he forsook my bed,
  And Helen's lovely daughter sought to wed;
  Then me to Trojan Helenus resigned,
  And his two slaves in equal marriage joined;
  Till young Orestes, pierced with deep despair,              }
  And longing to redeem the promised fair,                    }
  Before Apollo's altar slew the ravisher.                    }
  By Pyrrhus' death the kingdom we regained:
  At least one half with Helenus remained.
  Our part, from Chaon, he Chaonia calls,
  And names, from Pergamus, his rising walls.
  But you what fates have landed on our coast?
  What gods have sent you, or what storms have tossed?
  Does young Ascanius life and health enjoy,
  Saved from the ruins of unhappy Troy?
  O! tell me how his mother's loss he bears,                  }
  What hopes are promised from his blooming years,            }
  How much of Hector in his face appears?"--                  }
  She spoke; and mixed her speech with mournful cries,
  And fruitless tears came trickling from her eyes.
  At length her lord descends upon the plain,
  In pomp, attended with a numerous train;
  Receives his friends, and to the city leads,
  And tears of joy amidst his welcome sheds.
  Proceeding on, another Troy I see,
  Or, in less compass, Troy's epitome.
  A rivulet by the name of Xanthus ran,
  And I embrace the Scæan gate again.
  My friends in porticoes were entertained,
  And feasts and pleasures through the city reigned.
  The tables filled the spacious hall around,
  And golden bowls with sparkling wine were crowned.
  Two days we passed in mirth, till friendly gales,
  Blown from the south, supplied our swelling sails.
  Then to the royal seer I thus began:--
  "O thou, who know'st, beyond the reach of man,
  The laws of heaven, and what the stars decree,              }
  Whom Phœbus taught unerring prophecy,                    }
  From his own tripod, and his holy tree;                     }
  Skilled in the winged inhabitants of air,
  What auspices their notes and flights declare--
  O! say; for all religious rites portend
  A happy voyage, and a prosperous end;
  And every power and omen of the sky
  Direct my course for destined Italy;
  But only dire Celæno, from the gods,
  A dismal famine fatally forebodes--
  O! say, what dangers I am first to shun,
  What toils to vanquish, and what course to run."
    The prophet first with sacrifice adores
  The greater gods; their pardon then implores;
  Unbinds the fillet from his holy head;                      }
  To Phœbus, next, my trembling steps he led,              }
  Full of religious doubts and awful dread.                   }
  Then, with his god possessed, before the shrine,
  These words proceeded from his mouth divine:--
  "O goddess-born! (for heaven's appointed will,
  With greater auspices of good than ill,
  Foreshows thy voyage, and thy course directs;
  Thy fates conspire, and Jove himself protects,)
  Of many things, some few I shall explain,                   }
  Teach thee to shun the dangers of the main,                 }
  And how at length the promised shore to gain.               }
  The rest the Fates from Helenus conceal,
  And Juno's angry power forbids to tell.
  First, then, that happy shore, that seems so nigh,          }
  Will far from your deluded wishes fly;                      }
  Long tracts of seas divide your hopes from Italy:           }
  For you must cruize along Sicilian shores,
  And stem the currents with your struggling oars;
  Then round the Italian coast your navy steer;
  And, after this, to Circe's island veer;
  And, last, before your new foundations rise,
  Must pass the Stygian lake, and view the nether skies.
  Now mark the signs of future ease and rest,
  And bear them safely treasured in thy breast.
  When, in the shady shelter of a wood,
  And near the margin of a gentle flood,
  Thou shalt behold a sow upon the ground,
  With thirty sucking young encompassed round;
  The dam and offspring white as falling snow--               }
  These on thy city shall their name bestow,                  }
  And there shall end thy labours and thy woe.                }
  Nor let the threatened famine fright thy mind;
  For Phœbus will assist, and Fate the way will find.
  Let not thy course to that ill coast be bent,
  Which fronts from far the Epirian continent:
  Those parts are all by Grecian foes possessed.
  The savage Locrians here the shores infest:
  There fierce Idomeneus his city builds,
  And guards with arms the Salentinian fields;
  And on the mountain's brow Petilia stands,
  Which Philoctetes with his troops commands.
  Even when thy fleet is landed on the shore,
  And priests with holy vows the gods adore,
  Then with a purple veil involve your eyes,
  Lest hostile faces blast the sacrifice.
  These rites and customs to the rest commend,
  That to your pious race they may descend.
    "When, parted hence, the wind, that ready waits
  For Sicily, shall bear you to the straits,
  Where proud Pelorus opes a wider way,
  Tack to the larboard, and stand off to sea:
  Veer starboard sea and land. The Italian shore,
  And fair Sicilia's coast, were one, before
  An earthquake caused the flaw: the roaring tides            }
  The passage broke, that land from land divides;             }
  And, where the lands retired, the rushing ocean rides.      }
  Distinguished by the straights, on either hand,
  Now rising cities in long order stand,
  And fruitful fields:--so much can time invade
  The mouldering work, that beauteous Nature made.--
  Far on the right, her dogs foul Scylla hides:               }
  Charybdis roaring on the left presides,                     }
  And in her greedy whirlpool sucks the tides;                }
  Then spouts them from below: with fury driven,
  The waves mount up, and wash the face of heaven.
  But Scylla from her den, with open jaws,
  The sinking vessel in her eddy draws,
  Then dashes on the rocks.--A human face,
  And virgin bosom, hides her tail's disgrace:
  Her parts obscene below the waves descend,
  With dogs inclosed, and in a dolphin end.
  'Tis safer, then, to bear aloof to sea,
  And coast Pachynus, though with more delay,
  Than once to view mis-shapen Scylla near,
  And the loud yell of watery wolves to hear.
    "Besides, if faith to Helenus be due,
  And if prophetic Phœbus tell me true,
  Do not this precept of your friend forget,
  Which therefore more than once I must repeat:
  Above the rest, great Juno's name adore;
  Pay vows to Juno; Juno's aid implore.
  Let gifts be to the mighty queen designed,
  And mollify with prayers her haughty mind.
  Thus, at the length, your passage shall be free,
  And you shall safe descend on Italy.
  Arrived at Cumæ, when you view the flood
  Of black Avernus, and the sounding wood,
  The mad prophetic Sibyl you shall find,
  Dark in a cave, and on a rock reclined.
  She sings the fates, and, in her frantic fits,
  The notes and names, inscribed, to leaves commits.
  What she commits to leaves, in order laid,
  Before the cavern's entrance are displayed:
  Unmoved they lie; but, if a blast of wind
  Without, or vapours issue from behind,
  The leaves are borne aloft in liquid air,
  And she resumes no more her museful care,
  Nor gathers from the rocks her scattered verse,
  Nor sets in order what the winds disperse.
  Thus, many not succeeding, most upbraid                     }
  The madness of the visionary maid,                          }
  And with loud curses leave the mystic shade.                }
    "Think it not loss of time a while to stay,
  Though thy companions chide thy long delay;
  Though summoned to the seas, though pleasing gales
  Invite thy course, and stretch thy swelling sails:
  But beg the sacred priestess to relate
  With willing words, and not to write, thy fate.
  The fierce Italian people she will show,                    }
  And all thy wars, and all thy future woe,                   }
  And what thou may'st avoid, and what must undergo.          }
  She shall direct thy course, instruct thy mind,
  And teach thee how the happy shores to find.
  This is what heaven allows me to relate;                    }
  Now part in peace; pursue thy better fate,                  }
  And raise, by strength of arms, the Trojan state."          }
    This when the priest with friendly voice declared,
  He gave me licence, and rich gifts prepared:
  Bounteous of treasure, he supplied my want
  With heavy gold, and polished elephant,
  Then Dodonæan cauldrons put on board,
  And every ship with sums of silver stored.
  A trusty coat of mail to me he sent,
  Thrice chained with gold, for use and ornament;
  The helm of Pyrrhus added to the rest,
  That flourished with a plume and waving crest.
  Nor was my sire forgotten, nor my friends;
  And large recruits he to my navy sends--
  Men, horses, captains, arms, and warlike stores;
  Supplies new pilots, and new sweeping oars.
  Meantime, my sire commands to hoist our sails,
  Lest we should lose the first auspicious gales.
  The prophet blessed the parting crew, and, last,
  With words like these, his ancient friend embraced:--
  "Old happy man, the care of gods above,
  Whom heavenly Venus honoured with her love,
  And twice preserved thy life when Troy was lost!
  Behold from far the wished Ausonian coast:
  There land; but take a larger compass round,
  For that before is all forbidden ground.
  The shore that Phœbus has designed for you,
  At farther distance lies, concealed from view.
  Go happy hence, and seek your new abodes,
  Blessed in a son, and favoured by the gods:
  For I with useless words prolong your stay,
  When southern gales have summoned you away."
    Nor less the queen our parting thence deplored,
  Nor was less bounteous than her Trojan lord.
  A noble present to my son she brought,
  A robe with flowers on golden tissue wrought,
  A Phrygian vest; and loads with gifts beside
  Of precious texture, and of Asian pride.
  "Accept," she said, "these monuments of love,
  Which in my youth with happier hands I wove:
  Regard these trifles for the giver's sake;
  'Tis the last present Hector's wife can make.
  Thou call'st my lost Astyanax to mind;
  In thee, his features and his form I find.
  His eyes so sparkled with a lively flame;                    }
  Such were his motions; such was all his frame;               }
  And ah! had heaven so pleased, his years had been the same." }
    With tears I took my last adieu, and said,--
  "Your fortune, happy pair, already made,
  Leaves you no farther wish. My different state,
  Avoiding one, incurs another fate.
  To you a quiet seat the gods allow:
  You have no shores to search, no seas to plough,
  Nor fields of flying Italy to chase--
  Deluding visions, and a vain embrace!
  You see another Simoïs, and enjoy
  The labour of your hands, another Troy,
  With better auspice than her ancient towers,
  And less obnoxious to the Grecian powers.
  If e'er the gods, whom I with vows adore,
  Conduct my steps to Tyber's happy shore;
  If ever I ascend the Latian throne,
  And build a city I may call my own;
  As both of us our birth from Troy derive,                   }
  So let our kindred lines in concord live,                   }
  And both in acts of equal friendship strive.                }
  Our fortunes, good or bad, shall be the same:
  The double Troy shall differ but in name;
  That what we now begin, may never end,
  But long to late posterity descend."
    Near the Ceraunian rocks our course we bore,
  The shortest passage to the Italian shore.
  Now had the sun withdrawn his radiant light,
  And hills were hid in dusky shades of night:
  We land, and, on the bosom of the ground,
  A safe retreat and a bare lodging found.
  Close by the shore we lay; the sailors keep
  Their watches, and the rest securely sleep.
  The night, proceeding on with silent pace,                  }
  Stood in her noon, and viewed with equal face               }
  Her steepy rise, and her declining race.                    }
  Then wakeful Palinurus rose, to spy                       }
  The face of heaven, and the nocturnal sky;                }
  And listened, every breath of air to try;                 }
  Observes the stars, and notes their sliding course,
  The Pleiads, Hyads, and their watery force;
  And both the Bears is careful to behold,
  And bright Orion, armed with burnished gold.
  Then, when he saw no threatening tempest nigh,
  But a sure promise of a settled sky,
  He gave the sign to weigh: we break our sleep,
  Forsake the pleasing shore, and plough the deep.
  And now the rising morn with rosy light
  Adorns the skies, and puts the stars to flight;
  When we from far, like bluish mists, descry
  The hills, and then the plains, of Italy.
  Achates first pronounced the joyful sound;
  Then "Italy!" the cheerful crew rebound.
  My sire Anchises crowned a cup with wine,
  And, offering, thus implored the powers divine:--
  "Ye gods, presiding over lands and seas,
  And you who raging winds and waves appease,
  Breathe on our swelling sails a prosperous wind,
  And smooth our passage to the port assigned!"
  The gentle gales their flagging force renew,
  And now the happy harbour is in view.
  Minerva's temple then salutes our sight,
  Placed, as a landmark, on the mountain's height.
  We furl our sails, and turn the prows to shore;
  The curling waters round the galleys roar.
  The land lies open to the raging east,
  Then, bending like a bow, with rocks compressed,
  Shuts out the storms; the winds and waves complain,
  And vent their malice on the cliffs in vain.
  The port lies hid within; on either side,
  Two towering rocks the narrow mouth divide.
  The temple, which aloft we viewed before,
  To distance flies, and seems to shun the shore.
  Scarce landed, the first omens I beheld
  Were four white steeds that cropped the flowery field.
  "War, war is threatened from this foreign ground,
  (My father cried,) where warlike steeds are found.
  Yet since reclaimed, to chariots they submit,
  And bend to stubborn yokes, and champ the bit,
  Peace may succeed to war."--Our way we bend
  To Pallas, and the sacred hill ascend;
  There prostrate to the fierce virago pray,
  Whose temple was the landmark of our way.
  Each with a Phrygian mantle veiled his head,                }
  And all commands of Helenus obeyed,                         }
  And pious rites to Grecian Juno paid.                       }
  These dues performed, we stretch our sails, and stand
  To sea, forsaking that suspected land.
  From hence Tarentum's bay appears in view,
  For Hercules renowned, if fame be true.
  Just opposite, Lacinian Juno stands;
  Caulonian towers, and Scylacæan strands
  For shipwrecks feared. Mount Ætna thence we spy,
  Known by the smoky flames which cloud the sky.
  Far off we hear the waves with surly sound
  Invade the rocks, the rocks their groans rebound.
  The billows break upon the sounding strand,
  And roll the rising tide, impure with sand.
  Then thus Anchises, in experience old:--
  "'Tis that Charybdis which the seer foretold,
  And those the promised rocks! Bear off to sea!"
  With haste the frighted mariners obey.
  First Palinurus to the larboard veered;
  Then all the fleet by his example steered.
  To heaven aloft on ridgy waves we ride,
  Then down to hell descend, when they divide;
  And thrice our galleys knocked the stony ground,            }
  And thrice the hollow rocks returned the sound,             }
  And thrice we saw the stars, that stood with dews around.   }
  The flagging winds forsook us, with the sun;
  And, wearied, on Cyclopian shores we run.
  The port capacious, and secure from wind,
  Is to the foot of thundering Ætna joined.
  By turns a pitchy cloud she rolls on high;                  }
  By turns hot embers from her entrails fly,                  }
  And flakes of mounting flames, that lick the sky.           }
  Oft from her bowels massy rocks are thrown,
  And, shivered by the force, come piece-meal down.
  Oft liquid lakes of burning sulphur flow,
  Fed from the fiery springs that boil below.
  Enceladus, they say, transfixed by Jove,
  With blasted limbs came tumbling from above;
  And, where he fell, the avenging father drew
  This flaming hill, and on his body threw.
  As often as he turns his weary sides,
  He shakes the solid isle, and smoke the heavens hides.
  In shady woods we pass the tedious night,                   }
  Where bellowing sounds and groans our souls affright,       }
  Of which no cause is offered to the sight.                  }
  For not one star was kindled in the sky,
  Nor could the moon her borrowed light supply;
  For misty clouds involved the firmament,
  The stars were muffled, and the moon was pent.
  Scarce had the rising sun the day revealed,
  Scarce had his heat the pearly dews dispelled,
  When from the woods there bolts, before our sight,
  Somewhat betwixt a mortal and a sprite,
  So thin, so ghastly meagre, and so wan,
  So bare of flesh, he scarce resembled man.
  This thing, all tattered, seemed from far to implore
  Our pious aid, and pointed to the shore.
  We look behind, then view his shaggy beard;
  His clothes were tagged with thorns, and filth his limbs besmeared;
  The rest, in mien, in habit, and in face,
  Appeared a Greek, and such indeed he was.
  He cast on us, from far, a frightful view,
  Whom soon for Trojans and for foes he knew--
  Stood still, and paused; then all at once began
  To stretch his limbs, and trembled as he ran.
  Soon as approached, upon his knees he falls,
  And thus with tears and sighs for pity calls:--
  "Now, by the powers above, and what we share
  From Nature's common gift, this vital air,
  O Trojans, take me hence! I beg no more;
  But bear me far from this unhappy shore.
  'Tis true, I am a Greek, and farther own,
  Among your foes besieged the imperial town.
  For such demerits if my death be due,
  No more for this abandoned life I sue:
  This only favour let my tears obtain,
  To throw me headlong in the rapid main:
  Since nothing more than death my crime demands,
  I die content, to die by human hands."
  He said, and on his knees my knees embraced:
  I bade him boldly tell his fortune past,
  His present state, his lineage, and his name,
  The occasion of his fears, and whence he came.
  The good Anchises raised him with his hand;
  Who thus, encouraged, answered our demand:--
  "From Ithaca, my native soil, I came
  To Troy; and Achæmenides my name.
  Me my poor father with Ulysses sent;
  (O! had I stayed, with poverty content!)
  But, fearful for themselves, my countrymen
  Left me forsaken in the Cyclops' den.
  The cave, though large, was dark; the dismal floor
  Was paved with mangled limbs and putrid gore.
  Our monstrous host, of more than human size,
  Erects his head, and stares within the skies.
  Bellowing his voice, and horrid is his hue.
  Ye gods, remove this plague from mortal view!
  The joints of slaughtered wretches are his food;
  And for his wine he quaffs the streaming blood.
  These eyes beheld, when with his spacious hand
  He seized two captives of our Grecian band;
  Stretched on his back, he dashed against the stones
  Their broken bodies, and their crackling bones:
  With spouting blood the purple pavement swims,
  While the dire glutton grinds the trembling limbs.
  Not unrevenged Ulysses bore their fate,
  Nor thoughtless of his own unhappy state;
  For, gorged with flesh, and drunk with human wine,
  While fast asleep the giant lay supine,
  Snoaring aloud, and belching from his maw
  His indigested foam, and morsels raw--
  We pray; we cast the lots, and then surround
  The monstrous body, stretched along the ground:
  Each, as he could approach him, lends a hand
  To bore his eye-ball with a flaming brand.
  Beneath his frowning forehead lay his eye;
  For only one did the vast frame supply--
  But that a globe so large, his front it filled,
  Like the sun's disk, or like a Grecian shield.
  The stroke succeeds; and down the pupil bends;
  This vengeance followed for our slaughtered friends.--
  But haste, unhappy wretches! haste to fly!
  Your cables cut, and on your oars rely!
  Such, and so vast as Polypheme appears,
  A hundred more this hated island bears:
  Like him, in caves they shut their woolly sheep;               }
  Like him, their herds on tops of mountains keep;               }
  Like him, with mighty strides, they stalk from steep to steep. }
  And now three moons their sharpened horns renew,
  Since thus in woods and wilds, obscure from view,
  I drag my loathsome days with mortal fright,
  And in deserted caverns lodge by night;
  Oft from the rocks a dreadful prospect see
  Of the huge Cyclops, like a walking tree:
  From far I hear his thundering voice resound,
  And trampling feet that shake the solid ground.
  Cornels and savage berries of the wood,
  And roots and herbs, have been my meagre food.
  While all around my longing eyes I cast,
  I saw your happy ships appear at last.
  On those I fixed my hopes, to these I run;
  'Tis all I ask, this cruel race to shun;
  What other death you please, yourselves bestow."
  Scarce had he said, when on the mountain's brow
  We saw the giant shepherd stalk before
  His following flock, and leading to the shore--
  A monstrous bulk, deformed, deprived of sight;
  His staff a trunk of pine, to guide his steps aright.
  His ponderous whistle from his neck descends;               }
  His woolly care their pensive lord attends:                 }
  This only solace his hard fortune sends.                    }
  Soon as he reached the shore, and touched the waves,
  From his bored eye the guttering blood he laves:
  He gnashed his teeth, and groaned; through seas he strides,
  And scarce the topmost billows touched his sides.
  Seized with a sudden fear, we run to sea,
  The cables cut, and silent haste away;
  The well-deserving stranger entertain;
  Then, buckling to the work, our oars divide the main.
  The giant hearkened to the dashing sound:
  But, when our vessels out of reach he found,
  He strided onward, and in vain essayed
  The Ionian deep, and durst no farther wade.
  With that he roared aloud: the dreadful cry                 }
  Shakes earth, and air, and seas; the billows fly,           }
  Before the bellowing noise, to distant Italy.               }
  The neighbouring Ætna trembling all around,
  The winding caverns echo to the sound.
  His brother Cyclops hear the yelling roar,
  And, rushing down the mountains, crowd the shore.
  We saw their stern distorted looks, from far,
  And one-eyed glance, that vainly threatened war--
  A dreadful council! with their heads on high,
  (The misty clouds about their foreheads fly,)
  Not yielding to the towering tree of Jove,
  Or tallest cypress of Diana's grove.
  New pangs of mortal fear our minds assail;                  }
  We tug at every oar, and hoist up every sail,               }
  And take the advantage of the friendly gale.                }
  Forewarned by Helenus, we strive to shun
  Charybdis' gulf, nor dare to Scylla run.
  An equal fate on either side appears:
  We, tacking to the left, are free from fears;
  For, from Pelorus' point, the North arose,
  And drove us back where swift Pantagias flows.
  His rocky mouth we pass; and make our way
  By Thapsus, and Megara's winding bay.
  This passage Achæmenides had shown,
  Tracing the course which he before had run.
  Right o'er-against Plemmyrium's watery strand,
  There lies an isle, once called the Ortygian land.
  Alpheüs, as old fame reports, has found
  From Greece a secret passage under ground,
  By love to beauteous Arethusa led;
  And, mingling here, they roll in the same sacred bed.
  As Helenus enjoined, we next adore
  Diana's name, protectress of the shore.
  With prosperous gales we pass the quiet sounds
  Of still Helorus, and his fruitful bounds.
  Then, doubling Cape Pachynus, we survey
  The rocky shore extended to the sea.
  The town of Camarine from far we see,
  And fenny lake, undrained by Fate's decree.
  In sight of the Geloan fields we pass,
  And the large walls, where mighty Gela was;
  Then Agragas, with lofty summits crowned,
  Long for the race of warlike steeds renowned.
  We passed Selinus, and the palmy land,                      }
  And widely shun the Lilybæan strand,                        }
  Unsafe, for secret rocks and moving sand.                   }
  At length on shore the weary fleet arrived,
  Which Drepanum's unhappy port received.
  Here, after endless labours, often tossed                   }
  By raging storms, and driven on every coast,                }
  My dear, dear father, spent with age, I lost--              }
  Ease of my cares, and solace of my pain,
  Saved through a thousand toils, but saved in vain.
  The prophet, who my future woes revealed,
  Yet this, the greatest and the worst, concealed;
  And dire Celæno, whose foreboding skill
  Denounced all else, was silent of this ill.
  This my last labour was. Some friendly god
  From thence conveyed us to your blest abode."
    Thus, to the listening queen, the royal guest             }
  His wandering course and all his toils expressed;           }
  And here concluding, he retired to rest.                    }


FOOTNOTES:

[101] Dr Carey proposes to read _our_; but the alteration
seems unnecessary.




NOTE ON ÆNEÏS, BOOK III.


  And children's children shall the crown sustain.--P. 300.

  _Et nati natorum, et qui nascentur ab illis._

Virgil translated this verse from Homer, Homer had it from Orpheus,
and Orpheus from an ancient oracle of Apollo. On this account it is
that Virgil immediately subjoins these words, _Hæc Phœbus_, &c.
Eustathius takes notice, that the old poets were wont to take whole
paragraphs from one another; which justifies our poet for what he
borrows from Homer. Bochartus, in his letter to Ségrais, mentions an
oracle which he found in the fragments of an old Greek historian,
the sense whereof is this in English, that, when the empire of the
Priamidæ should be destroyed, the line of Anchises should succeed.
Venus therefore, says the historian, was desirous to have a son by
Anchises, though he was then in his decrepit age; accordingly she had
Æneas. After this, she sought occasion to ruin the race of Priam, and
set on foot the intrigue of Alexander (or Paris) with Helena. She being
ravished, Venus pretended still to favour the Trojans, lest they should
restore Helen, in case they should be reduced to the last necessity.
Whence it appears, that the controversy betwixt Juno and Venus was on
no trivial account, but concerned the succession to a great empire.




ÆNEÏS,




BOOK IV.

ARGUMENT.

 _Dido discovers to her sister her passion for Æneas, and her thoughts
 of marrying him. She prepares a hunting-match for his entertainment.
 Juno, by Venus's consent, raises a storm, which separates the hunters,
 and drives Æneas and Dido into the same cave, where their marriage is
 supposed to be completed. Jupiter dispatches Mercury to Æneas, to warn
 him from Carthage. Æneas secretly prepares for his voyage. Dido finds
 out his design, and, to put a stop to it, makes use of her own and her
 sister's entreaties, and discovers all the variety of passions that
 are incident to a neglected lover. When nothing would prevail upon
 him, she contrives her own death, with which this book concludes._


  But anxious cares already seized the queen;
  She fed within her veins a flame unseen;
  The hero's valour, acts, and birth, inspire
  Her soul with love, and fan the secret fire.
  His words, his looks, imprinted in her heart,
  Improve the passion, and increase the smart.
  Now, when the purple morn had chased away
  The dewy shadows, and restored the day,
  Her sister first with early care she sought,
  And thus in mournful accents eased her thought:--
  "My dearest Anna! what new dreams affright
  My labouring soul! what visions of the night
  Disturb my quiet, and distract my breast
  With strange ideas of our Trojan guest!
  His worth, his actions, and majestic air,
  A man descended from the gods declare.
  Fear ever argues a degenerate kind;
  His birth is well asserted by his mind.
  Then, what he suffered, when by Fate betrayed!
  What brave attempts for falling Troy he made!
  Such were his looks, so gracefully he spoke,
  That, were I not resolved against the yoke
  Of hapless marriage--never to be cursed
  With second love, so fatal was my first--
  To this one error I might yield again;
  For, since Sichæus was untimely slain,
  This only man is able to subvert
  The fixed foundations of my stubborn heart.
  And, to confess my frailty, to my shame,                    }
  Somewhat I find within, if not the same,                    }
  Too like the sparkles of my former flame.                   }
  But first let yawning earth a passage rend,
  And let me through the dark abyss descend--
  First let avenging Jove, with flames from high,             }
  Drive down this body to the nether sky,                     }
  Condemned with ghosts in endless night to lie--             }
  Before I break the plighted faith I gave!                 }
  No! he who had my vows, shall ever have;                  }
  For, whom I loved on earth, I worship in the grave."      }
    She said: the tears ran gushing from her eyes,
  And stopped her speech. Her sister thus replies:--
  "O dearer than the vital air I breathe!
  Will you to grief your blooming years bequeath,
  Condemned to waste in woes your lonely life,
  Without the joys of mother, or of wife?
  Think you these tears, this pompous train of woe,
  Are known or valued by the ghosts below?
  I grant, that, while your sorrows yet were green,
  It well became a woman, and a queen,
  The vows of Tyrian princes to neglect,
  To scorn Iarbas, and his love reject,
  With all the Libyan lords of mighty name;
  But will you fight against a pleasing flame?
  This little spot of land, which heaven bestows,
  On every side is hemmed with warlike foes;
  Gætulian cities here are spread around,
  And fierce Numidians there your frontiers bound;
  Here lies a barren waste of thirsty land,
  And there the Syrtes raise the moving sand;
  Barcæan troops besiege the narrow shore,
  And from the sea Pygmalion threatens more.
  Propitious heaven, and gracious Juno, lead
  This wandering navy to your needful aid:
  How will your empire spread, your city rise,
  From such a union, and with such allies!
  Implore the favour of the powers above,
  And leave the conduct of the rest to love.
  Continue still your hospitable way,
  And still invent occasions of their stay,
  Till storms and winter winds shall cease to threat,
  And planks and oars repair their shattered fleet."
    These words, which from a friend and sister came,         }
  With ease resolved the scruples of her fame,                }
  And added fury to the kindled flame.                        }
  Inspired with hope, the project they pursue;
  On every altar sacrifice renew;
  A chosen ewe of two years old they pay
  To Ceres, Bacchus, and the god of day.
  Preferring Juno's power, (for Juno ties
  The nuptial knot, and makes the marriage-joys,)
  The beauteous queen before her altar stands,
  And holds the golden goblet in her hands.
  A milk-white heifer she with flowers adorns,
  And pours the ruddy wine betwixt her horns;
  And, while the priests with prayer the gods invoke,
  She feeds their altars with Sabæan smoke,
  With hourly care the sacrifice renews,
  And anxiously the panting entrails views.
  What priestly rites, alas! what pious art,
  What vows, avail to cure a bleeding heart?
  A gentle fire she feeds within her veins,
  Where the soft god secure in silence reigns.
    Sick with desire, and seeking him she loves,
  From street to street the raving Dido roves.
  So, when the watchful shepherd, from the blind,
  Wounds with a random shaft the careless hind,
  Distracted with her pain she flies the woods,
  Bounds o'er the lawn, and seeks the silent floods--
  With fruitless care; for still the fatal dart
  Sticks in her side, and rankles in her heart.
  And now she leads the Trojan chief along
  The lofty walls, amidst the busy throng;
  Displays her Tyrian wealth, and rising town,
  Which love, without his labour, makes his own.
  This pomp she shows, to tempt her wandering guest;
  Her faultering tongue forbids to speak the rest.
  When day declines, and feasts renew the night,
  Still on his face she feeds her famished sight;
  She longs again to hear the prince relate
  His own adventures, and the Trojan fate.
  He tells it o'er and o'er; but still in vain,
  For still she begs to hear it once again.
  The hearer on the speaker's mouth depends,
  And thus the tragic story never ends.
    Then, when they part, when Phœbe's paler light
  Withdraws, and falling stars to sleep invite,
  She last remains, when every guest is gone,
  Sits on the bed he pressed, and sighs alone;
  Absent, her absent hero sees and hears;
  Or in her bosom young Ascanius bears,
  And seeks the father's image in the child,
  If love by likeness might be so beguiled.
    Meantime the rising towers are at a stand;
  No labours exercise the youthful band,
  Nor use of arts, nor toils of arms they know;
  The mole is left unfinished to the foe;
  The mounds, the works, the walls, neglected lie,
  Short of their promised height, that seemed to threat the sky.
    But when imperial Juno, from above,
  Saw Dido fettered in the chains of love,
  Hot with the venom which her veins inflamed,
  And by no sense of shame to be reclaimed,
  With soothing words to Venus she begun:--
  "High praises, endless honours, you have won,
  And mighty trophies, with your worthy son!
  Two gods a silly woman have undone!
  Nor am I ignorant, you both suspect
  This rising city, which my hands erect:
  But shall celestial discord never cease?
  'Tis better ended in a lasting peace.
  You stand possessed of all your soul desired;
  Poor Dido with consuming love is fired.
  Your Trojan with my Tyrian let us join;                     }
  So Dido shall be yours, Æneas mine--                        }
  One common kingdom, one united line.                        }
  Eliza shall a Dardan lord obey,
  And lofty Carthage for a dower convey."
  Then Venus (who her hidden fraud descried,                  }
  Which would the sceptre of the world misguide               }
  To Libyan shores) thus artfully replied:--                  }
  "Who, but a fool, would wars with Juno chuse,
  And such alliance and such gifts refuse,
  If Fortune with our joint desires comply?
  The doubt is all from Jove, and destiny;[102]
  Lest he forbid, with absolute command,
  To mix the people in one common land--
  Or will the Trojan and the Tyrian line,
  In lasting leagues and sure succession, join.
  But you, the partner of his bed and throne,
  May move his mind; my wishes are your own."
  "Mine," said imperial Juno, "be the care:--                 }
  Time urges now:--to perfect this affair,                    }
  Attend my counsel, and the secret share.                    }
  When next the Sun his rising light displays,
  And gilds the world below with purple rays,
  The queen, Æneas, and the Tyrian court,
  Shall to the shady woods, for sylvan game, resort.
  There, while the huntsmen pitch their toils around,
  And cheerful horns, from side to side, resound,
  A pitchy cloud shall cover all the plain
  With hail, and thunder, and tempestuous rain;
  The fearful train shall take their speedy flight,
  Dispersed, and all involved in gloomy night;
  One cave a grateful shelter shall afford
  To the fair princess and the Trojan lord.
  I will myself the bridal bed prepare,
  If you, to bless the nuptials, will be there:
  So shall their loves be crowned with due delights,
  And Hymen shall be present at the rites."
  The queen of love consents, and closely smiles
  At her vain project, and discovered wiles.
    The rosy morn was risen from the main,
  And horns and hounds awake the princely train:
  They issue early through the city gate,
  Where the more wakeful huntsmen ready wait,
  With nets, and toils, and darts, beside the force
  Of Spartan dogs, and swift Massylian horse.
  The Tyrian peers and officers of state,
  For the slow queen, in antechambers wait;
  Her lofty courser, in the court below,
  Who his majestic rider seems to know,
  Proud of his purple trappings, paws the ground,
  And champs the golden bit, and spreads the foam around.
  The queen at length appears: on either hand,
  The brawny guards in martial order stand.
  A flowered cymar with golden fringe she wore,
  And at her back a golden quiver bore;
  Her flowing hair a golden caul restrains,
  A golden clasp the Tyrian robe sustains.
  Then young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace,
  Leads on the Trojan youth to view the chase.
  But far above the rest in beauty shines
  The great Æneas, when the troop he joins;
  Like fair Apollo, when he leaves the frost
  Of wintery Xanthus, and the Lycian coast,
  When to his native Delos he resorts,
  Ordains the dances, and renews the sports;
  Where painted Scythians, mixed with Cretan bands,
  Before the joyful altars join their hands:
  Himself, on Cynthus walking, sees below
  The merry madness of the sacred show.
  Green wreaths of bays his length of hair inclose;
  A golden fillet binds his awful brows;
  His quiver sounds.--Not less the prince is seen
  In manly presence, or in lofty mien.
    Now had they reached the hills, and stormed the seat
  Of savage beasts, in dens, their last retreat.
  The cry pursues the mountain-goats: they bound
  From rock to rock, and keep the craggy ground:
  Quite otherwise the stags, a trembling train,               }
  In herds unsingled, scour the dusty plain,                  }
  And a long chase, in open view, maintain.                   }
  The glad Ascanius, as his courser guides,
  Spurs through the vale, and these and those outrides.
  His horses flanks and sides are forced to feel
  The clanking lash, and goring of the steel.
  Impatiently he views the feeble prey,
  Wishing some nobler beast to cross his way,
  And rather would the tusky boar attend,
  Or see the tawny lion downward bend.
    Meantime, the gathering clouds obscure the skies:
  From pole to pole the forky lightning flies;
  The rattling thunders roll; and Juno pours
  A wintry deluge down, and sounding showers.
  The company, dispersed, to coverts ride,
  And seek the homely cots, or mountain's hollow side.
  The rapid rains, descending from the hills,
  To rolling torrents raise the creeping rills.
  The queen and prince, as Love or Fortune guides,
  One common cavern in her bosom hides.
  Then first the trembling earth the signal gave,
  And flashing fires enlighten all the cave;
  Hell from below, and Juno from above,
  And howling nymphs, were conscious to their love.
  From this ill-omen'd hour, in time arose
  Debate and death, and all succeeding woes.
    The queen, whom sense of honour could not move,
  No longer made a secret of her love,
  But called it marriage, by that specious name
  To veil the crime, and sanctify the shame.
    The loud report through Libyan cities goes.
  Fame, the great ill, from small beginnings grows--
  Swift from the first; and every moment brings
  New vigour to her flights, new pinions to her wings.
  Soon grows the pygmy to gigantic size;
  Her feet on earth, her forehead in the skies.
  Enraged against the gods, revengeful Earth
  Produced her, last of the Titanian birth--
  Swift is her walk, more swift her winged haste--
  A monstrous phantom, horrible and vast.
  As many plumes as raise her lofty flight,
  So many piercing eyes enlarge her sight;
  Millions of opening mouths to Fame belong,                  }
  And every mouth is furnished with a tongue,                 }
  And round with listening ears the flying plague is hung.    }
  She fills the peaceful universe with cries;
  No slumbers ever close her wakeful eyes;
  By day, from lofty towers her head she shews,
  And spreads through trembling crowds disastrous news;
  With court informers haunts, and royal spies;
  Things done relates, not done she feigns, and mingles truth with lies.
  Talk is her business; and her chief delight
  To tell of prodigies, and cause affright.
  She fills the people's ears with Dido's name,
  Who, "lost to honour and the sense of shame,
  Admits into her throne and nuptial bed
  A wandering guest, who from his country fled:
  Whole days with him she passes in delights,
  And wastes in luxury long winter nights,
  Forgetful of her fame, and royal trust,
  Dissolved in ease, abandoned to her lust."
    The goddess widely spreads the loud report,
  And flies at length to king Iarbas' court.
  When first possessed with this unwelcome news,
  Whom did he not of men and gods accuse?
  This prince, from ravished Garamantis born,
  A hundred temples did with spoils adorn,
  In Ammon's honour, his celestial sire;
  A hundred altars fed with wakeful fire;
  And, through his vast dominions, priests ordained,
  Whose watchful care these holy rites maintained.
  The gates and columns were with garlands crowned,
  And blood of victim beasts enriched the ground.
    He, when he heard a fugitive could move
  The Tyrian princess, who disdained his love,
  His breast with fury burned, his eyes with fire,
  Mad with despair, impatient with desire;
  Then on the sacred altars pouring wine,
  He thus with prayers implored his sire divine:--
  "Great Jove, propitious to the Moorish race,
  Who feast on painted beds, with offerings grace
  Thy temples, and adore thy power divine
  With blood of victims, and with sparkling wine!
  Seest thou not this? or do we fear in vain
  Thy boasted thunder, and thy thoughtless reign?
  Do thy broad hands the forky lightnings lance?
  Thine are the bolts, or the blind work of chance?
  A wandering woman builds, within our state,
  A little town, bought at an easy rate;
  She pays me homage; (and my grants allow
  A narrow space of Libyan lands to plough)
  Yet, scorning me, by passion blindly led,
  Admits a banished Trojan to her bed!
  And now this other Paris, with his train
  Of conquered cowards, must in Afric reign!
  (Whom, what they are, their looks and garb confess,
  Their locks with oil perfumed, their Lydian dress.)
  He takes the spoil, enjoys the princely dame;
  And I, rejected I, adore an empty name!"
    His vows, in haughty terms, he thus preferred,
  And held his altar's horns. The mighty Thunderer heard,
  Then cast his eyes on Carthage, where he found
  The lustful pair in lawless pleasure drowned,
  Lost in their loves, insensible of shame,
  And both forgetful of their better fame.
  He calls Cyllenius, and the god attends,
  By whom this menacing command he sends:--
  "Go, mount the western winds, and cleave the sky;
  Then, with a swift descent, to Carthage fly:
  There find the Trojan chief, who wastes his days
  In slothful riot and inglorious ease,
  Nor minds the future city, given by Fate.
  To him this message from my mouth relate:--
  Not so fair Venus hoped, when twice she won
  Thy life with prayers, nor promised such a son.
  Hers was a hero, destined to command
  A martial race, and rule the Latian land;
  Who should his ancient line from Teucer draw,
  And on the conquered world impose the law.
  If glory cannot move a mind so mean,
  Nor future praise from fading pleasure wean,
  Yet why should he defraud his son of fame,
  And grudge the Romans their immortal name?
  What are his vain designs? what hopes he more
  From his long lingering on a hostile shore,
  Regardless to redeem his honour lost,
  And for his race to gain the Ausonian coast?
  Bid him with speed the Tyrian court forsake;
  With this command the slumbering warrior wake."
    Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
  His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
  And, whether o'er the seas or earth he flies,
  With rapid force they bear him down the skies.
  But first he grasps within his awful hand
  The mark of sovereign power, his magic wand;
  With this he draws the ghosts from hollow graves;
  With this he drives them down the Stygian waves;
  With this he seals in sleep the wakeful sight,
  And eyes, though closed in death, restores to light.
  Thus armed, the god begins his airy race,
  And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space;
  Now sees the top of Atlas, as he flies,
  Whose brawny back supports the starry skies;
  Atlas, whose head, with piny forests crowned,
  Is beaten by the winds, with foggy vapours bound.
  Snows hide his shoulders; from beneath his chin
  The founts of rolling streams their race begin;
  A beard of ice on his large breast depends.--
  Here, poised upon his wings, the god descends:
  Then, rested thus, he from the towering height
  Plunged downward with precipitated flight,
  Lights on the seas, and skims along the flood.
  As water-fowl, who seek their fishy food,
  Less, and yet less, to distant prospect show;
  By turns they dance aloft, and dive below:
  Like these, the steerage of his wings he plies,
  And near the surface of the water flies,
  Till, having passed the seas, and crossed the sands,
  He closed his wings, and stooped on Libyan lands,
  Where shepherds once were housed in homely sheds;
  Now towers within the clouds advance their heads.
  Arriving there, he found the Trojan prince
  New ramparts raising for the town's defence.
  A purple scarf, with gold embroidered o'er,
  (Queen Dido's gift) about his waist he wore;
  A sword, with glittering gems diversified,
  For ornament, not use, hung idly by his side.
  Then thus, with winged words, the god began,
  Resuming his own shape--"Degenerate man!
  Thou woman's property! what mak'st thou here,
  These foreign walls and Tyrian towers to rear,
  Forgetful of thy own? All-powerful Jove,
  Who sways the world below and heaven above,
  Has sent me down with this severe command:
  What means thy lingering in the Libyan land?
  If glory cannot move a mind so mean,
  Nor future praise from flitting pleasure wean,
  Regard the fortunes of thy rising heir:
  The promised crown let young Ascanius wear,
  To whom the Ausonian sceptre, and the state
  Of Rome's imperial name, is owed by Fate."
  So spoke the god; and, speaking, took his flight,
  Involved in clouds, and vanished out of sight.
    The pious prince was seized with sudden fear;
  Mute was his tongue, and upright stood his hair.
  Revolving in his mind the stern command,
  He longs to fly, and loaths the charming land.
  What should he say? or how should he begin?}
  What course, alas! remains to steer between}
  The offended lover and the powerful queen? }
  This way, and that, he turns his anxious mind,
  And all expedients tries, and none can find.
  Fixed on the deed, but doubtful of the means,
  After long thought, to this advice he leans:
  Three chiefs he calls, commands them to repair
  The fleet, and ship their men, with silent care:
  Some plausible pretence he bids them find,
  To colour what in secret he designed.
  Himself, meantime, the softest hours would chuse,
  Before the love-sick lady heard the news;
  And move her tender mind, by slow degrees,
  To suffer what the sovereign power decrees:
  Jove will inspire him, when, and what to say.--
  They hear with pleasure, and with haste obey.
    But soon the queen perceives the thin disguise:
  (What arts can blind a jealous woman's eyes?)
  She was the first to find the secret fraud,
  Before the fatal news was blazed abroad.
  Love the first motions of the lover hears,
  Quick to presage, and even in safety fears.
  Nor impious Fame was wanting, to report                     }
  The ships repaired, the Trojans' thick resort,              }
  And purpose to forsake the Tyrian court.                    }
  Frantic with fear, impatient of the wound,
  And impotent of mind, she roves the city round.
  Less wild the Bacchanalian dames appear,                    }
  When, from afar, their nightly god they hear,               }
  And howl about the hills, and shake the wreathy spear.      }
  At length she finds the dear perfidious man;
  Prevents his formed excuse, and thus began:--
  "Base and ungrateful! could you hope to fly,
  And undiscovered 'scape a lover's eye?
  Nor could my kindness your compassion move,
  Nor plighted vows, nor dearer bands of love?
  Or is the death of a despairing queen
  Not worth preventing, though too well foreseen?
  Even when the wintery winds command your stay,
  You dare the tempests, and defy the sea.
  False, as you are, suppose you were not bound
  To lands unknown, and foreign coasts to sound;
  Were Troy restored, and Priam's happy reign,
  Now durst you tempt, for Troy, the raging main?
  See, whom you fly! am I the foe you shun?
  Now, by those holy vows, so late begun,
  By this right hand, (since I have nothing more
  To challenge, but the faith you gave before,)
  I beg you by these tears too truly shed,
  By the new pleasures of our nuptial bed;
  If ever Dido, when you most were kind,
  Were pleasing in your eyes, or touched your mind;
  By these my prayers, if prayers may yet have place,
  Pity the fortunes of a falling race!
  For you, I have provoked a tyrant's hate,
  Incensed the Libyan and the Tyrian state;
  For you alone, I suffer in my fame,
  Bereft of honour, and exposed to shame!
  Whom have I now to trust, ungrateful guest?
  (That only name remains of all the rest!)
  What have I left? or whither can I fly?
  Must I attend Pygmalion's cruelty,
  Or till Iarbas shall in triumph lead
  A queen, that proudly scorned his proffered bed?
  Had you deferred, at least, your hasty flight,              }
  And left behind some pledge of our delight,                 }
  Some babe to bless the mother's mournful sight,             }
  Some young Æneas to supply your place,
  Whose features might express his father's face;
  I should not then complain to live bereft
  Of all my husband, or be wholly left."
    Here paused the queen. Unmoved he holds his eyes,         }
  By Jove's command; nor suffered love to rise,               }
  Though heaving in his heart; and thus at length replies:--  }
  "Fair queen, you never can enough repeat
  Your boundless favours, or I own my debt;
  Nor can my mind forget Eliza's name,
  While vital breath inspires this mortal frame.
  This only let me speak in my defence--
  I never hoped a secret flight from hence,
  Much less pretended to the lawful claim
  Of sacred nuptials, or a husband's name.
  For, if indulgent heaven would leave me free,
  And not submit my life to Fate's decree,
  My choice would lead me to the Trojan shore,                }
  Those reliques to review, their dust adore,                 }
  And Priam's ruined palace to restore.                       }
  But now the Delphian oracle commands,
  And Fate invites me to the Latian lands.
  That is the promised place to which I steer,
  And all my vows are terminated there.
  If you, a Tyrian and a stranger born,
  With walls and towers a Libyan town adorn,
  Why may not we--like you, a foreign race--
  Like you, seek shelter in a foreign place?
  As often as the night obscures the skies
  With humid shades, or twinkling stars arise,
  Anchises' angry ghost in dreams appears,
  Chides my delay, and fills my soul with fears;
  And young Ascanius justly may complain,
  Defrauded of his fate, and destined reign.
  Even now the herald of the gods appeared--
  Waking I saw him, and his message heard.
  From Jove he came commissioned, heavenly bright
  With radiant beams, and manifest to sight:
  (The sender and the sent I both attest,)
  These walls he entered, and those words expressed:--
  Fair queen, oppose not what the gods command;
  Forced by my fate, I leave your happy land."
    Thus while he spoke, already she began,
  With sparkling eyes, to view the guilty man;
  From head to foot surveyed his person o'er,
  Nor longer these outrageous threats forbore:--
  "False as thou art, and, more than false, forsworn!
  Not sprung from noble blood, nor goddess-born,
  But hewn from hardened entrails of a rock!
  And rough Hyrcanian tygers gave thee suck!
  Why should I fawn? what have I worse to fear?               }
  Did he once look, or lent a listening ear,                  }
  Sighed when I sobbed, or shed one kindly tear?              }
  All symptoms of a base ungrateful mind,
  So foul, that, which is worse, 'tis hard to find.
  Of man's injustice why should I complain?
  The gods, and Jove himself, behold in vain
  Triumphant treason; yet no thunder flies,                   }
  Nor Juno views my wrongs with equal eyes;                   }
  Faithless is earth, and faithless are the skies!            }
  Justice is fled, and truth is now no more!
  I saved the shipwrecked exile on my shore;
  With needful food his hungry Trojans fed;
  I took the traitor to my throne and bed:
  Fool that I was--'tis little to repeat
  The rest--I stored and rigged his ruined fleet.
  I rave, I rave! A god's command he pleads,
  And makes heaven accessory to his deeds.
  Now Lycian lots, and now the Delian god,
  Now Hermes is employed from Jove's abode,
  To warn him hence; as if the peaceful state
  Of heavenly powers were touched with human fate!
  But go! thy flight no longer I detain--
  Go! seek thy promised kingdom through the main!
  Yet, if the heavens will hear my pious vow,
  The faithless waves, not half so false as thou,
  Or secret sands, shall sepulchres afford
  To thy proud vessels, and their perjured lord.
  Then shalt thou call on injured Dido's name:                }
  Dido shall come in a black sulphury flame,                  }
  When death has once dissolved her mortal frame--            }
  Shall smile to see the traitor vainly weep:               }
  Her angry ghost, arising from the deep,                   }
  Shall haunt thee waking, and disturb thy sleep.           }
  At least my shade thy punishment shall know,
  And Fame shall spread the pleasing news below."
    Abruptly here she stops--then turns away
  Her loathing eyes, and shuns the sight of day.
  Amazed he stood, revolving in his mind
  What speech to frame, and what excuse to find.
  Her fearful maids their fainting mistress led,
  And softly laid her on her ivory bed.
    But good Æneas, though he much desired
  To give that pity which her grief required--
  Though much he mourned, and laboured with his love--
  Resolved at length, obeys the will of Jove;
  Reviews his forces: they with early care
  Unmoor their vessels, and for sea prepare.
  The fleet is soon afloat, in all its pride,
  And well-caulked galleys in the harbour ride.
  Then oaks for oars they felled; or, as they stood,
  Of its green arms despoiled the growing wood,
  Studious of flight. The beach is covered o'er
  With Trojan bands, that blacken all the shore:
  On every side are seen, descending down,
  Thick swarms of soldiers, loaden from the town.
  Thus, in battalia, march embodied ants,
  Fearful of winter, and of future wants,
  To invade the corn, and to their cells convey
  The plundered forage of their yellow prey.
  The sable troops, along the narrow tracks,
  Scarce bear the weighty burden on their backs:
  Some set their shoulders to the ponderous grain;            }
  Some guard the spoil; some lash the lagging train;          }
  All ply their several tasks, and equal toil sustain.        }
  What pangs the tender breast of Dido tore,
  When, from the tower, she saw the covered shore,
  And heard the shouts of sailors from afar,
  Mixed with the murmurs of the watery war!
  All-powerful Love! what changes canst thou cause
  In human hearts, subjected to thy laws!
  Once more her haughty soul the tyrant bends:
  To prayers and mean submissions she descends.
  No female arts or aids she left untried,
  Nor counsels unexplored, before she died.
  "Look, Anna! look! the Trojans crowd to sea;
  They spread their canvas, and their anchors weigh.
  The shouting crew their ships with garlands bind,
  Invoke the sea-gods, and invite the wind.
  Could I have thought this threatening blow so near,
  My tender soul had been forewarned to bear.
  But do not you my last request deny;                        }
  With yon perfidious man your interest try,                  }
  And bring me news, if I must live or die.                   }
  You are his favourite; you alone can find
  The dark recesses of his inmost mind:
  In all his trusted secrets you have part,
  And know the soft approaches to his heart.
  Haste then, and humbly seek my haughty foe;
  Tell him, I did not with the Grecians go,
  Nor did my fleet against his friends employ,
  Nor swore the ruin of unhappy Troy,
  Nor moved with hands prophane his father's dust:
  Why should he then reject a suit so just?
  Whom does he shun? and whither would he fly?
  Can he this last, this only prayer deny?
  Let him at least his dangerous flight delay,
  Wait better winds, and hope a calmer sea.
  The nuptials he disclaims, I urge no more:
  Let him pursue the promised Latian shore.
  A short delay is all I ask him now--
  A pause of grief, an interval from woe,
  Till my soft soul be tempered to sustain
  Accustomed sorrows, and inured to pain.
  If you in pity grant this one request,
  My death shall glut the hatred of his breast."
  This mournful message pious Anna bears,
  And seconds, with her own, her sister's tears:
  But all her arts are still employed in vain;
  Again she comes, and is refused again.
  His hardened heart nor prayers nor threatenings move;
  Fate, and the god, had stopped his ears to love.
    As, when the winds their airy quarrel try,
  Jostling from every quarter of the sky,
  This way and that the mountain oak they bend,
  His boughs they shatter, and his branches rend;
  With leaves and falling mast they spread the ground;
  The hollow valleys echo to the sound:
  Unmoved, the royal plant their fury mocks,
  Or, shaken, clings more closely to the rocks:
  Far as he shoots his towering head on high,
  So deep in earth his fixed foundations lie.--
  No less a storm the Trojan hero bears;                      }
  Thick messages and loud complaints he hears,                }
  And bandied words, still beating on his ears.               }
  Sighs, groans, and tears, proclaim his inward pains;
  But the firm purpose of his heart remains.
    The wretched queen, pursued by cruel Fate,
  Begins at length the light of heaven to hate,
  And loaths to live. Then dire portents she sees,
  To hasten on the death her soul decrees--
  Strange to relate! for when, before the shrine,
  She pours in sacrifice the purple wine,
  The purple wine is turned to putrid blood,
  And the white offered milk converts to mud.
  This dire presage, to her alone revealed,
  From all, and even her sister, she concealed.
  A marble temple stood within the grove,
  Sacred to death, and to her murdered love;
  That honoured chapel she had hung around
  With snowy fleeces, and with garlands crowned:
  Oft, when she visited this lonely dome,
  Strange voices issued from her husband's tomb:
  She thought she heard him summon her away,
  Invite her to his grave, and chide her stay.
  Hourly 'tis heard, when with a boding note
  The solitary screech-owl strains her throat,
  And, on a chimney's top, or turret's height,
  With songs obscene, disturbs the silence of the night.
  Besides, old prophecies augment her fears;
  And stern Æneas in her dreams appears,
  Disdainful as by day: she seems, alone,
  To wander in her sleep, through ways unknown,
  Guideless and dark; or, in a desert plain,
  To seek her subjects, and to seek in vain--
  Like Pentheus, when, distracted with his fear,
  He saw two suns, and double Thebes, appear;
  Or mad Orestes, when his mother's ghost
  Full in his face infernal torches tossed,
  And shook her snaky locks: he shuns the sight,              }
  Flies o'er the stage, surprised with mortal fright;         }
  The Furies guard the door, and intercept his flight.        }
    Now, sinking underneath a load of grief,
  From death alone she seeks her last relief;
  The time and means resolved within her breast,
  She to her mournful sister thus addressed:--
  (Dissembling hope, her cloudy front she clears,
  And a false vigour in her eyes appears.)
  "Rejoice!" she said. "Instructed from above,
  My lover I shall gain, or lose my love.
  Nigh rising Atlas, next the falling sun,
  Long tracts of Ethiopian climates run:
  There a Massylian priestess I have found,
  Honoured for age, for magic arts renowned:
  The Hesperian temple was her trusted care;
  'Twas she supplied the wakeful dragon's fare.
  She poppy-seeds in honey taught to steep,
  Reclaimed his rage, and soothed him into sleep:
  She watched the golden fruit. Her charms unbind
  The chains of love, or fix them on the mind:
  She stops the torrents, leaves the channel dry,
  Repels the stars, and backward bears the sky.
  The yawning earth rebellows to her call,
  Pale ghosts ascend, and mountain ashes fall.
  Witness, ye gods, and thou my better part,
  How loth I am to try this impious art!
  Within the secret court, with silent care,
  Erect a lofty pile, exposed in air:
  Hang, on the topmost part, the Trojan vest,
  Spoils, arms, and presents, of my faithless guest.
  Next, under these, the bridal bed be placed,
  Where I my ruin in his arms embraced.
  All reliques of the wretch are doomed to fire;
  For so the priestess and her charms require."
  Thus far she said, and farther speech forbears.
  A mortal paleness in her face appears:
  Yet the mistrustless Anna could not find                    }
  The secret funeral, in these rites designed;                }
  Nor thought so dire a rage possessed her mind.              }
  Unknowing of a train concealed so well,
  She feared no worse than when Sichæus fell;
  Therefore obeys. The fatal pile they rear,
  Within the secret court, exposed in air.
  The cloven holms and pines are heaped on high,
  And garlands on the hollow spaces lie.
  Sad cypress, vervain, yew, compose the wreath,
  And every baleful green denoting death.
  The queen, determined to the fatal deed,                    }
  The spoils and sword he left, in order spread,              }
  And the man's image on the nuptial bed.                     }
    And now (the sacred altars placed around)               }
  The priestess enters, with her hair unbound,              }
  And thrice invokes the powers below the ground.           }
  Night, Erebus, and Chaos, she proclaims,
  And threefold Hecate, with her hundred names,
  And three Dianas: next, she sprinkles round,
  With feigned Avernian drops, the hallowed ground;
  Culls hoary simples, found by Phœbe's light,
  With brazen sickles reaped at noon of night;
  Then mixes baleful juices in the bowl,
  And cuts the forehead of a new-born foal,
  Robbing the mother's love.--The destined queen
  Observes, assisting at the rites obscene:
  A leavened cake in her devoted hands
  She holds, and next the highest altar stands:
  One tender foot was shod, her other bare,
  Girt was her gathered gown, and loose her hair.
  Thus dressed, she summoned, with her dying breath,
  The heavens and planets conscious of her death,
  And every power, if any rules above,
  Who minds, or who revenges, injured love.
    'Twas dead of night, when weary bodies close
  Their eyes in balmy sleep, and soft repose:
  The winds no longer whisper through the woods,
  Nor murmuring tides disturb the gentle floods.
  The stars in silent order moved around;
  And Peace, with downy wings, was brooding on the ground.
  The flocks and herds, and party-coloured fowl,
  Which haunt the woods, or swim the weedy pool,
  Stretched on the quiet earth, securely lay,
  Forgetting the past labours of the day.
  All else of nature's common gift partake:
  Unhappy Dido was alone awake.
  Nor sleep nor ease the furious queen can find;
  Sleep fled her eyes, as quiet fled her mind.
  Despair, and rage, and love, divide her heart;
  Despair and rage had some, but love the greater part.
    Then thus she said within her secret mind:--
  "What shall I do? what succour can I find?
  Become a suppliant to Iarbas' pride,
  And take my turn to court, and be denied?
  Shall I with this ungrateful Trojan go,
  Forsake an empire, and attend a foe?
  Himself I refuged, and his train relieved--
  'Tis true--but am I sure to be received?
  Can gratitude in Trojan souls have place?
  Laomedon still lives in all his race!
  Then, shall I seek alone the churlish crew,
  Or with my fleet their flying sails pursue?
  What force have I but those, whom scarce before
  I drew reluctant from their native shore?
  Will they again embark at my desire,
  Once more sustain the seas, and quit their second Tyre?
  Rather with steel thy guilty breast invade,
  And take the fortune thou thyself hast made.
  Your pity, sister, first seduced my mind,
  Or seconded too well what I designed.
  These dear-bought pleasures had I never known,
  Had I continued free, and still my own--
  Avoiding love, I had not found despair,
  But shared with savage beasts the common air.
  Like them, a lonely life I might have led,
  Not mourned the living, nor disturbed the dead."
  These thoughts she brooded in her anxious breast.--
  On board, the Trojan found more easy rest.
  Resolved to sail, in sleep he passed the night;
  And ordered all things for his early flight.
    To whom once more the winged god appears;                 }
  His former youthful mien and shape he wears,                }
  And with this new alarm invades his ears:--                 }
  "Sleep'st thou, O goddess-born? and canst thou drown
  Thy needful cares, so near a hostile town,
  Beset with foes; nor hear'st the western gales
  Invite thy passage, and inspire thy sails?
  She harbours in her heart a furious hate,
  And thou shalt find the dire effects too late;
  Fixed on revenge, and obstinate to die.
  Haste swiftly hence, while thou hast power to fly.
  The sea with ships will soon be covered o'er,
  And blazing firebrands kindle all the shore.
  Prevent her rage, while night obscures the skies,
  And sail before the purple morn arise.
  Who knows what hazards thy delay may bring?
  Woman's a various and a changeful thing."--
  Thus Hermes in the dream; then took his flight
  Aloft in air unseen, and mixed with night.
    Twice warned by the celestial messenger,
  The pious prince arose with hasty fear;
  Then roused his drowsy train without delay:                 }
  "Haste to your banks! your crooked anchors weigh,           }
  And spread your flying sails, and stand to sea!             }
  A God commands: he stood before my sight,
  And urged us once again to speedy flight.
  O sacred power! what power soe'er thou art,
  To thy blessed orders I resign my heart.
  Lead thou the way; protect thy Trojan bands,
  And prosper the design thy will commands."--
  He said; and, drawing forth his flaming sword,
  His thundering arm divides the many-twisted cord.
  An emulating zeal inspires his train:
  They run; they snatch; they rush into the main.
  With headlong haste they leave the desert shores,
  And brush the liquid seas with labouring oars.
    Aurora now had left her saffron bed,
  And beams of early light the heavens o'erspread,
  When, from a tower, the queen, with wakeful eyes,
  Saw day point upward from the rosy skies.
  She looked to seaward; but the sea was void,
  And scarce in ken the sailing ships descried.
  Stung with despite, and furious with despair,
  She struck her trembling breast, and tore her hair.
  "And shall the ungrateful traitor go, (she said,)
  My land forsaken, and my love betrayed?
  Shall we not arm? not rush from every street,
  To follow, sink, and burn, his perjured fleet?
  Haste, haul my galleys out! pursue the foe!
  Bring flaming brands! set sail, and swiftly row!--
  What have I said? where am I? Fury turns
  My brain; and my distempered bosom burns.
  Then, when I gave my person and my throne,
  This hate, this rage, had been more timely shown.
  See now the promised faith, the vaunted name,
  The pious man, who, rushing through the flame,
  Preserved his gods, and to the Phrygian shore
  The burden of his feeble father bore!
  I should have torn him piece-meal--strewed in floods
  His scattered limbs, or left exposed in woods--
  Destroyed his friends, and son; and, from the fire,
  Have set the reeking boy before the sire.
  Events are doubtful, which on battle wait:
  Yet where's the doubt, to souls secure of fate?
  My Tyrians, at their injured queen's command,
  Had tossed their fires amid the Trojan band;
  At once extinguished all the faithless name;                }
  And I myself, in vengeance of my shame,                     }
  Had fallen upon the pile, to mend the funeral flame.        }
  Thou Sun, who view'st at once the world below!
  Thou Juno, guardian of the nuptial vow!
  Thou Hecate, hearken from thy dark abodes!
  Ye Furies, Fiends, and violated Gods!
  All powers invoked with Dido's dying breath,
  Attend her curses, and avenge her death!
  If so the Fates ordain, and Jove commands,
  The ungrateful wretch should find the Latian lands,
  Yet let a race untamed, and haughty foes,
  His peaceful entrance with dire arms oppose:
  Oppressed with numbers in the unequal field,
  His men discouraged, and himself expelled,
  Let him for succour sue from place to place,
  Torn from his subjects, and his son's embrace.
  First, let him see his friends in battle slain,
  And their untimely fate lament in vain:
  And when, at length, the cruel war shall cease,
  On hard conditions may he buy his peace:
  Nor let him then enjoy supreme command;                     }
  But fall, untimely, by some hostile hand,                   }
  And lie unburied on the barren sand!                        }
  These are my prayers, and this my dying will;
  And you, my Tyrians, every curse fulfil.
  Perpetual hate, and mortal wars proclaim,
  Against the prince, the people, and the name.
  These grateful offerings on my grave bestow;
  Nor league, nor love, the hostile nations know!
  Now, and from hence, in every future age,
  When rage excites your arms, and strength supplies the rage,
  Rise some avenger of our Libyan blood,
  With fire and sword pursue the perjured brood;
  Our arms, our seas, our shores, opposed to theirs;
  And the same hate descend on all our heirs!"
    This said, within her anxious mind she weighs
  The means of cutting short her odious days.
  Then to Sichæus' nurse she briefly said,
  (For, when she left her country, her's was dead,)
  "Go, Barce, call my sister. Let her care
  The solemn rites of sacrifice prepare;
  The sheep, and all the atoning offerings, bring;
  Sprinkling her body from the crystal spring
  With living drops; then let her come, and thou
  With sacred fillets bind thy hoary brow.
  Thus will I pay my vows to Stygian Jove,
  And end the cares of my disastrous love;
  Then cast the Trojan image on the fire,
  And, as that burns, my passion shall expire."
    The nurse moves onward with officious care,
  And all the speed her aged limbs can bear.
  But furious Dido, with dark thoughts involved,
  Shook at the mighty mischief she resolved.
  With livid spots distinguished was her face;
  Red were her rolling eyes, and discomposed her pace;
  Ghastly she gazed, with pain she drew her breath,
  And nature shivered at approaching death.
    Then swiftly to the fatal place she passed,
  And mounts the funeral pile with furious haste;
  Unsheaths the sword the Trojan left behind,
  (Not for so dire an enterprize designed.)
  But when she viewed the garments loosely spread,
  Which once he wore, and saw the conscious bed,
  She paused, and, with a sigh, the robes embraced,           }
  Then on the couch her trembling body cast,                  }
  Repressed the ready tears, and spoke her last:--            }
  "Dear pledges of my love, while heaven so pleased,
  Receive a soul, of mortal anguish eased.
  My fatal course is finished; and I go,
  A glorious name, among the ghosts below.
  A lofty city by my hands is raised;
  Pygmalion punished, and my lord appeased.
  What could my fortune have afforded more,
  Had the false Trojan never touched my shore?"
  Then kissed the couch; and "Must I die," she said,
  "And unrevenged? 'tis doubly to be dead!
  Yet even this death with pleasure I receive:
  On any terms, 'tis better than to live.
  These flames, from far, may the false Trojan view;
  These boding omens his base flight pursue!"
  She said, and struck; deep entered in her side
  The piercing steel, with reeking purple dyed:
  Clogged in the wound the cruel weapon stands;
  The spouting blood came streaming on her hands.
  Her sad attendants saw the deadly stroke,
  And with loud cries the sounding palace shook.
  Distracted, from the fatal sight they fled,
  And through the town the dismal rumour spread.
  First, from the frighted court the yell began;
  Redoubled, thence from house to house it ran:
  The groans of men, with shrieks, laments, and cries
  Of mixing women, mount the vaulted skies.
  Not less the clamour, than if--ancient Tyre,
  Or the new Carthage, set by foes on fire--
  The rolling ruin, with their loved abodes,
  Involved the blazing temples of their gods.
  Her sister hears; and, furious with despair,
  She beats her breast, and rends her yellow hair,
  And, calling on Eliza's name aloud,
  Runs breathless to the place, and breaks the crowd.
  "Was all that pomp of woe for this prepared,
  These fires, this funeral pile, these altars reared?
  Was all this train of plots contrived, (said she,)
  All only to deceive unhappy me?
  Which is the worst? Didst thou in death pretend
  To scorn thy sister, or delude thy friend?
  Thy summoned sister, and thy friend, had come;
  One sword had served us both, one common tomb:
  Was I to raise the pile, the powers invoke,
  Not to be present at the fatal stroke?
  At once thou hast destroyed thyself and me,
  Thy town, thy senate, and thy colony!
  Bring water! bathe the wound; while I in death
  Lay close my lips to hers, and catch the flying breath."
  This said, she mounts the pile with eager haste,
  And in her arms the gasping queen embraced;
  Her temples chafed; and her own garments tore,
  To staunch the streaming blood, and cleanse the gore.
  Thrice Dido tried to raise her drooping head,
  And, fainting, thrice fell grovelling on the bed;
  Thrice oped her heavy eyes, and saw the light,              }
  But, having found it, sickened at the sight,                }
  And closed her lids at last in endless night.               }
  Then Juno, grieving that she should sustain
  A death so lingering, and so full of pain,
  Sent Iris down, to free her from the strife
  Of labouring nature, and dissolve her life.
  For, since she died, not doomed by heaven's decree,
  Or her own crime, but human casualty,
  And rage of love, that plunged her in despair,
  The Sisters had not cut the topmost hair,
  Which Proserpine and they can only know;
  Nor made her sacred to the shades below.--
  Downward the various Goddess took her flight,
  And drew a thousand colours from the light;
  Then stood above the dying lover's head,
  And said, "I thus devote thee to the dead.
  This offering to the infernal gods I bear."                 }
  Thus while she spoke, she cut the fatal hair:               }
  The struggling soul was loosed, and life dissolved in air.  }


FOOTNOTES:

[102] This is very obscurely worded, and _lest_ seems to
be used unauthorisedly in the sense of _whether_. The doubt, says
the goddess, is, whether Jove will prohibit or sanction the proposed
alliance. The old copies placed a period after _destiny_, and a point
of interrogation after _join_. EDIT.




NOTE ON ÆNEÏS, BOOK IV.


  ----_And "must I die," she said,
  "And unrevenged? 'tis doubly to be dead!
  Yet even this death with pleasure I receive;
  On any terms, 'tis better than to live."_--P. 351.

This is certainly the sense of Virgil, on which I have paraphrased, to
make it plain. His words are these:

  ----_Moriemur inultæ?
  Sed moriamur, ait; sic, sic juvat ire sub umbras._

Servius makes an interrogation at the word _sic_; thus, _sic? Sic juvat
ire sub umbras_; which Mr Cowley justly censures: but his own judgment
may perhaps be questioned; for he would retrench the latter part of
the verse, and leave it a hemistick,--_Sed moriamur, ait_. That Virgil
never intended to have left any hemistick, I have proved already in the
preface. That this verse was filled up by him with these words, _sic,
sic juvat ire sub umbras_, is very probable, if we consider the weight
of them; for this procedure of Dido does not only contain that _dira
execratio, quæ nullo expiatur carmine_,[103] (as Horace observes in his
"Canidia,") but, besides that, Virgil, who is full of allusions to
history, under another name describes the Decii devoting themselves to
death this way, though in a better cause, in order to the destruction
of the enemy. The reader, who will take the pains to consult Livy in
his accurate description of those Decii thus devoting themselves,
will find a great resemblance betwixt these two passages. And it is
judiciously observed upon that verse,

  _Nulla fides populis nec fœdera sunto_,

that Virgil uses, in the word _sunto_, a _verbum juris_, a form of
speaking on solemn and religious occasions. Livy does the like. Note
also, that Dido puts herself into the _habitus Gabinus_, which was
the girding herself round with one sleeve of her vest; which is also
according to the Roman pontifical, in this dreadful ceremony, as Livy
has observed; which is a farther confirmation of this conjecture.
So that, upon the whole matter, Dido only doubts whether she should
die before she had taken her revenge, which she rather wished; but,
considering that this devoting herself was the most certain and
infallible way of compassing her vengeance, she thus exclaims:

  ----_Sic, sic juvat ire sub umbras!
  Hauriat hunc oculis ignem crudelis ab alto
  Dardanus, et nostræ secum ferat omina mortis?_

  Those flames from far may the false Trojan view;
  Those boding omens his base flight pursue!

which translation I take to be according to the sense of Virgil. I
should have added a note on that former verse,

  _Infelix Dido! nunc te_ fata _impia tangunt_--

which, in the edition of Heinsius, is thus printed, _nunc te_ facta
_impia tangunt?_ The word _facta_, instead of _fata_, is reasonably
altered; for Virgil says afterwards, she died not by fate, nor by any
deserved death, _nec fato, meritâ nec morte, peribat, &c._ When I
translated that passage, I doubted of the sense, and therefore omitted
that hemistick, _nunc te fata impia tangunt_. But Heinsius is mistaken
only in making an interrogation-point instead of a period. The words
_facta impia_, I suppose, are genuine; for she had perjured herself in
her second marriage, having firmly resolved, as she told her sister
in the beginning of this Æneid, never to love again, after the death
of her first husband; and had confirmed this resolution by a curse on
herself, if she should alter it:

  _Sed mihi vel tellus, optem, prius ima dehiscat, &c.
  Ante, pudor, quam te violem, aut tua jura resolvam.
  Ille meos, primus qui me sibi junxit, amores
  Abstulit: ille habeat secum, servetque sepulcro._


FOOTNOTES:

[103] Read,

            ----_dira detestatio
  Nulla expiatur victima._      Epod. v. 89.




ÆNEÏS,


BOOK V.

ARGUMENT.

 _Æneas, setting sail from Afric, is driven by a storm on the coast
 of Sicily, where he is hospitably received by his friend Acestes,
 king of part of the island, and born of Trojan parentage. He applies
 himself to celebrate the memory of his father with divine honours, and
 accordingly institutes funeral games, and appoints prizes for those
 who should conquer in them. While the ceremonies were performing,
 Juno sends Iris to persuade the Trojan women to burn the ships, who,
 upon her instigation, set fire to them; which burned four, and would
 have consumed the rest, had not Jupiter, by a miraculous shower,
 extinguished it. Upon this, Æneas, by the advice of one of his
 generals, and a vision of his father, builds a city for the women,
 old men, and others, who were either unfit for war, or weary of the
 voyage, and sails for Italy. Venus procures of Neptune a safe voyage
 for him and all his men, excepting only his pilot Palinurus, who was
 unfortunately lost._[104]

  Meantime the Trojan cuts his watery way,
  Fixed on his voyage, through the curling sea;
  Then, casting back his eyes, with dire amaze,
  Sees on the Punic shore the mounting blaze.
  The cause unknown; yet his presaging mind                   }
  The fate of Dido from the fire divined;                     }
  He knew the stormy souls of woman-kind,                     }
  What secret springs their eager passions move,
  How capable of death for injured love.
  Dire auguries from hence the Trojans draw;
  Till neither fires nor shining shores they saw.
  Now seas and skies their prospect only bound--
  An empty space above, a floating field around.
  But soon the heavens with shadows were o'erspread;
  A swelling cloud hung hovering o'er their head:
  Livid it looked--the threatening of a storm:
  Then night and horror ocean's face deform.
  The pilot, Palinurus, cried aloud,--
  "What gusts of weather from that gathering cloud
  My thoughts presage! Ere yet the tempest roars,
  Stand to your tackle, mates, and stretch your oars;
  Contract your swelling sails, and luff to wind."
  The frighted crew perform the task assigned.
  Then, to his fearless chief,--"Not heaven, (said he)        }
  Though Jove himself should promise Italy,                   }
  Can stem the torrent of this raging sea.                    }
  Mark, how the shifting winds from west arise,
  And what collected night involves the skies!
  Nor can our shaken vessels live at sea,                     }
  Much less against the tempest force their way.              }
  'Tis Fate diverts our course, and Fate we must obey.        }
  Not far from hence, if I observed aright
  The southing of the stars, and polar light,
  Sicilia lies, whose hospitable shores
  In safety we may reach with struggling oars."
  Æneas then replied:--"Too sure I find,
  We strive in vain against the seas and wind:
  Now shift your sails; what place can please me more
  Than what you promise, the Sicilian shore,
  Whose hallowed earth Anchises' bones contains,
  And where a prince of Trojan lineage reigns?"
  The course resolved, before the western wind
  They scud amain, and make the port assigned.
    Meantime Acestes, from a lofty stand,
  Beheld the fleet descending on the land;
  And, not unmindful of his ancient race,                     }
  Down from the cliff he ran with eager pace,                 }
  And held the hero in a strict embrace.                      }
  Of a rough Libyan bear the spoils he wore,
  And either hand a pointed javelin bore.
  His mother was a dame of Dardan blood;
  His sire Crinisus, a Sicilian flood.
  He welcomes his returning friends ashore
  With plenteous country cates, and homely store.
    Now, when the following morn had chased away
  The flying stars, and light restored the day,
  Æneas called the Trojan troops around,
  And thus bespoke them from a rising ground:--
  "Offspring of heaven, divine Dardanian race!
  The sun, revolving through the etherial space,
  The shining circle of the year has filled,
  Since first this isle my father's ashes held:
  And now the rising day renews the year--
  A day for ever sad, for ever dear.
  This would I celebrate with annual games,
  With gifts on altars piled, and holy flames,
  Though banished to Gætulia's barren sands,
  Caught on the Grecian seas, or hostile lands:
  But since this happy storm our fleet has driven
  (Not, as I deem, without the will of heaven)
  Upon these friendly shores, and flowery plains,
  Which hide Anchises and his blest remains,
  Let us with joy perform his honours due,
  And pray for prosperous winds, our voyage to renew--
  Pray, that, in towns and temples of our own,                }
  The name of great Anchises may be known,                    }
  And yearly games may spread the god's renown.               }
  Our sports Acestes, of the Trojan race,
  With royal gifts ordained, is pleased to grace:
  Two steers on every ship the king bestows:
  His gods and ours shall share your equal vows.
  Besides, if, nine days hence, the rosy morn
  Shall with unclouded light the skies adorn,
  That day with solemn sports I mean to grace:
  Light galleys on the seas shall run a watery race:
  Some shall in swiftness for the goal contend,
  And others try the twanging bow to bend:
  The strong, with iron gauntlets armed, shall stand
  Opposed in combat on the yellow sand.
  Let all be present at the games prepared,
  And joyful victors wait the just reward.
  But now assist the rites, with garlands crowned."
  He said, and first his brows with myrtle bound.
  Then Helymus, by his example led,
  And old Acestes, each adorned his head;
  Thus young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace,
  His temples tied, and all the Trojan race.
    Æneas then advanced amidst the train,
  By thousands followed through the flowery plain,
  To great Anchises' tomb; which when he found,
  He poured to Bacchus, on the hallowed ground,
  Two bowls of sparkling wine, of milk two more,
  And two (from offered bulls) of purple gore.
  With roses then the sepulchre he strow'd,
  And thus his father's ghost bespoke aloud:--
  "Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
  Paternal ashes, now reviewed in vain!
  The gods permitted not, that you, with me,                  }
  Should reach the promised shores of Italy,                  }
  Or Tyber's flood, what flood soe'er it be."                 }
  Scarce had he finished, when, with speckled pride,
  A serpent from the tomb began to glide;
  His hugy bulk on seven high volumes rolled;
  Blue was his breadth of back, but streaked with scaly gold:
  Thus riding on his curls, he seemed to pass
  A rolling fire along, and singe the grass.
  More various colours through his body run,
  Than Iris when her bow imbibes the sun.
  Betwixt the rising altars, and around,
  The sacred monster shot along the ground;
  With harmless play amidst the bowls he passed,
  And with his lolling tongue assayed the taste:
  Thus fed with holy food, the wondrous guest
  Within the hollow tomb retired to rest.
  The pious prince, surprised at what he viewed,
  The funeral honours with more zeal renewed,
  Doubtful if this the place's genius were,
  Or guardian of his father's sepulchre.
  Five sheep, according to the rites, he slew;
  As many swine, and steers of sable hue;
  New generous wine he from the goblets poured,
  And called his father's ghost, from hell restored.
  The glad attendants in long order come,
  Offering their gifts at great Anchises' tomb:
  Some add more oxen; some divide the spoil;                  }
  Some place the chargers on the grassy soil;                 }
  Some blow the fires, and offered entrails boil.             }
    Now came the day desired. The skies were bright
  With rosy lustre of the rising light:
  The bordering people, roused by sounding fame
  Of Trojan feasts and great Acestes' name,
  The crowded shore with acclamations fill,
  Part to behold, and part to prove their skill.
  And first the gifts in public view they place,
  Green laurel wreaths, and palm, the victors' grace:
  Within the circle, arms and tripods lie,                    }
  Ingots of gold and silver heaped on high,                   }
  And vests embroidered, of the Tyrian dye.                   }
  The trumpet's clangor then the feast proclaims,
  And all prepare for their appointed games.
  Four galleys first, which equal rowers bear,
  Advancing, in the watery lists appear.
  The speedy Dolphin, that outstrips the wind,
  Bore Mnestheus, author of the Memmian kind:
  Gyas the vast Chimæra's bulk commands,
  Which rising like a towering city stands:
  Three Trojans tug at every labouring oar;                   }
  Three banks in three degrees the sailors bore;              }
  Beneath their sturdy strokes the billows roar.              }
  Sergestus, who began the Sergian race,
  In the great Centaur took the leading place:
  Cloanthus on the sea-green Scylla stood,
  From whom Cluentius draws his Trojan blood.
    Far in the sea, against the foaming shore,
  There stands a rock: the raging billows roar
  Above his head in storms; but, when 'tis clear,
  Uncurl their ridgy backs, and at his foot appear.
  In peace below the gentle waters run;
  The cormorants above lie basking in the sun.
  On this the hero fixed an oak in sight,
  The mark to guide the mariners aright.
  To bear with this, the seamen stretch their oars;
  Then round the rock they steer, and seek the former shores.
  The lots decide their place. Above the rest,
  Each leader shining in his Tyrian vest;
  The common crew, with wreaths of poplar boughs,
  Their temples crown, and shade their sweaty brows;
  Besmeared with oil, their naked shoulders shine.
  All take their seats, and wait the sounding sign:
  They gripe their oars; and every panting breast
  Is raised by turns with hope, by turns with fear depressed.
  The clangor of the trumpet gives the sign;
  At once they start, advancing in a line:
  With shouts the sailors rend the starry skies;              }
  Lashed with their oars, the smoky billows rise;             }
  Sparkles the briny main, and the vexed ocean fries.         }
  Exact in time, with equal strokes they row:               }
  At once the brushing oars and brazen prow                 }
  Dash up the sandy waves, and ope the depths below.        }
  Not fiery coursers, in a chariot race,
  Invade the field with half so swift a pace:
  Not the fierce driver with more fury lends                  }
  The sounding lash, and ere the stroke descends,             }
  Low to the wheels his pliant body bends.                    }
  The partial crowd their hopes and fears divide,
  And aid, with eager shouts, the favoured side.
  Cries, murmurs, clamours, with a mixing sound,
  From woods to woods, from hills to hills, rebound.
    Amidst the loud applauses of the shore,
  Gyas outstripped the rest, and sprung before:
  Cloanthus, better manned, pursued him fast,
  But his o'er-masted galley checked his haste.
  The Centaur and the Dolphin brush the brine
  With equal oars, advancing in a line;
  And now the mighty Centaur seems to lead,
  And now the speedy Dolphin gets a-head;
  Now board to board the rival vessels row,
  The billows lave the skies, and ocean groans below.
  They reached the mark. Proud Gyas and his train
  In triumph rode, the victors of the main;
  But, steering round, he charged his pilot stand
  More close to shore, and skim along the sand;--
  "Let others bear to sea!"--Menœtes heard;                }
  But secret shelves too cautiously he feared,                }
  And, fearing, sought the deep; and still aloof he steered.  }
  With louder cries the captain called again:--
  "Bear to the rocky shore, and shun the main."
  He spoke, and, speaking, at his stern he saw
  The bold Cloanthus near the shelvings draw.
  Betwixt the mark and him the Scylla stood,
  And in a closer compass ploughed the flood.
  He passed the mark; and, wheeling, got before:--            }
  Gyas blasphemed the gods, devoutly swore,                   }
  Cried out for anger, and his hair he tore.                  }
  Mindless of others' lives, (so high was grown
  His rising rage,) and careless of his own,
  The trembling dotard to the deck he drew,
  And hoisted up, and overboard he threw:
  This done, he seized the helm; his fellows cheered,
  Turned short upon the shelves, and madly steered.
    Hardly his head the plunging pilot rears,
  Clogged with his clothes, and cumbered with his years:
  Now dropping wet, he climbs the cliff with pain.
  The crowd, that saw him fall and float again,
  Shout from the distant shore; and loudly laught,
  To see his heaving breast disgorge the briny draught.
  The following Centaur, and the Dolphin's crew,
  Their vanished hopes of victory renew;
  While Gyas lags, they kindle in the race,
  To reach the mark. Sergestus takes the place;
  Mnestheus pursues; and, while around they wind,
  Comes up, not half his galley's length behind;
  Then on the deck, amidst his mates, appeared,
  And thus their drooping courages he cheered:--
  "My friends, and Hector's followers heretofore,
  Exert your vigour; tug the labouring oar;
  Stretch to your strokes, my still unconquered crew,
  Whom from the flaming walls of Troy I drew.
  In this our common interest, let me find
  That strength of hand, that courage of the mind,
  As when you stemmed the strong Malean flood,
  And o'er the Syrtes' broken billows rowed.
  I seek not now the foremost palm to gain;                   }
  Though yet--but, ah! that haughty wish is vain!             }
  Let those enjoy it whom the gods ordain.                    }
  But to be last, the lags of all the race!--
  Redeem yourselves and me from that disgrace."
  Now, one and all, they tug amain; they row
  At the full stretch, and shake the brazen prow.
  The sea beneath them sinks; their labouring sides
  Are swelled, and sweat runs guttering down in tides.
  Chance aids their daring with unhoped success:
  Sergestus, eager with his beak to press
  Betwixt the rival galley and the rock,
  Shuts up the unwieldy Centaur in the lock.
  The vessel struck; and, with the dreadful shock,
  Her oars she shivered, and her head she broke.
  The trembling rowers from their banks arise,
  And, anxious for themselves, renounce the prize.
  With iron poles they heave her off the shores,
  And gather from the sea their floating oars.
  The crew of Mnestheus, with elated minds,
  Urge their success, and call the willing winds,
  Then ply their oars, and cut their liquid way
  In larger compass on the roomy sea.
  As, when the dove her rocky hold forsakes,
  Roused in a fright, her sounding wings she shakes;
  The cavern rings with clattering; out she flies,
  And leaves her callow care, and cleaves the skies:
  At first she flutters; but at length she springs
  To smoother flight, and shoots upon her wing:
  So Mnestheus in the Dolphin cuts the sea;
  And, flying with a force, that force assists his way.
  Sergestus in the Centaur soon he passed,
  Wedged in the rocky shoals, and sticking fast.
  In vain the victor he with cries implores,
  And practises to row with shattered oars.
  Then Mnestheus bears with Gyas, and outflies:
  The ship, without a pilot, yields the prize.
  Unvanquished Scylla now alone remains;
  Her he pursues, and all his vigour strains.
  Shouts from the favouring multitude arise;                    }
  Applauding Echo to the shouts replies;                        }
  Shouts, wishes, and applause, run rattling through the skies. }
  These clamours with disdain the Scylla heard,
  Much grudged the praise, but more the robbed reward:
  Resolved to hold their own, they mend their pace,
  All obstinate to die, or gain the race.
  Raised with success, the Dolphin swiftly ran;
  For they can conquer, who believe they can.
  Both urge their oars, and Fortune both supplies,
  And both perhaps had shared an equal prize;
  When to the seas Cloanthus holds his hands,
  And succour from the watery powers demands:--
  "Gods of the liquid realms, on which I row!                 }
  If, given by you, the laurel bind my brow,                  }
  (Assist to make me guilty of my vow!)                       }
  A snow-white bull shall on your shore be slain;
  His offered entrails cast into the main,
  And ruddy wine from golden goblets thrown,
  Your grateful gift and my return shall own."
  The choir of nymphs, and Phorcus, from below,
  With virgin Panopea, heard his vow;
  And old Portunus, with his breadth of hand,
  Pushed on, and sped the galley to the land.
  Swift as a shaft, or winged wind, she flies,
  And, darting to the port, obtains the prize.
  The herald summons all, and then proclaims
  Cloanthus conqueror of the naval games.
  The prince with laurel crowns the victor's head,
  And three fat steers are to his vessel led,
  The ship's reward; with generous wine beside,
  And sums of silver, which the crew divide.
  The leaders are distinguished from the rest;
  The victor honoured with a nobler vest,
  Where gold and purple strive in equal rows,
  And needle-work its happy cost bestows.
  There, Ganymede is wrought with living art,
  Chasing through Ida's groves the trembling hart:
  Breathless he seems, yet eager to pursue;
  When from aloft descends, in open view,
  The bird of Jove, and, sousing on his prey,
  With crooked talons bears the boy away.
  In vain, with lifted hands and gazing eyes,                 }
  His guards behold him soaring through the skies,            }
  And dogs pursue his flight with imitated cries.             }
    Mnestheus the second victor was declared;
  And, summoned there, the second prize he shared--
  A coat of mail, which brave Demoleus bore,                  }
  More brave Æneas from his shoulders tore,                   }
  In single combat on the Trojan shore.                       }
  This was ordained for Mnestheus to possess--
  In war for his defence, for ornament in peace.
  Rich was the gift, and glorious to behold,
  But yet so ponderous with its plates of gold,
  That scarce two servants could the weight sustain;          }
  Yet, loaded thus, Demoleus o'er the plain                   }
  Pursued, and lightly seized, the Trojan train.              }
  The third, succeeding to the last reward,
  Two goodly bowls of massy silver shared,
  With figures prominent, and richly wrought,
  And two brass cauldrons from Dodona brought.
    Thus all, rewarded by the hero's hands,
  Their conquering temples bound with purple bands.
  And now Sergestus, clearing from the rock,
  Brought back his galley shattered with the shock.
  Forlorn she looked, without an aiding oar,
  And, hooted by the vulgar, made to shore;
  As when a snake, surprised upon the road,
  Is crushed athwart her body by the load
  Of heavy wheels; or with a mortal wound
  Her belly bruised, and trodden to the ground--
  In vain, with loosened curls, she crawls along;
  Yet, fierce above, she brandishes her tongue;
  Glares with her eyes, and bristles with her scales;
  But, grovelling in the dust, her parts unsound she trails.
  So slowly to the port the Centaur tends,
  But, what she wants in oars, with sails amends.
  Yet, for his galley saved, the grateful prince
  Is pleased the unhappy chief to recompense.
  Pholoe, the Cretan slave, rewards his care,
  Beauteous herself, with lovely twins as fair.
    From thence his way the Trojan hero bent
  Into the neighbouring plain, with mountains pent,
  Whose sides were shaded with surrounding wood.
  Full in the midst of this fair valley, stood
  A native theatre, which, rising slow
  By just degrees, o'erlooked the ground below.
  High on a sylvan throne the leader sate;
  A numerous train attend in solemn state.
  Here those, that in the rapid course delight,
  Desire of honour, and the prize, invite.
  The rival runners without order stand;
  The Trojans, mixed with the Sicilian band.
  First Nisus, with Euryalus, appears--
  Euryalus a boy of blooming years,
  With sprightly grace and equal beauty crowned--
  Nisus, for friendship to the youth, renowned.
  Diores next, of Priam's royal race,
  Then Salius, joined with Patron, took their place;
  (But Patron in Arcadia had his birth,
  And Salius, his from Acarnanian earth;)
  Then two Sicilian youths--the names of these,
  Swift Helymus, and lovely Panopes,
  (Both jolly huntsmen, both in forests bred,
  And owning old Acestes for their head,)
  With several others of ignobler name,
  Whom time has not delivered o'er to fame.
    To these the hero thus his thoughts explained,
  In words which general approbation gained:--
  "One common largess is for all designed,
  (The vanquished and the victor shall be joined,)
  Two darts of polished steel and Gnossian wood,
  A silver-studded axe, alike bestowed.
  The foremost three have olive wreaths decreed:
  The first of these obtains a stately steed
  Adorned with trappings; and the next in fame,
  The quiver of an Amazonian dame,
  With feathered Thracian arrows well supplied:               }
  A golden belt shall gird his manly side,                    }
  Which with a sparkling diamond shall be tied.               }
  The third this Grecian helmet shall content."
  He said. To their appointed base they went;
  With beating hearts the expected sign receive,
  And, starting all at once, the barrier leave.
  Spread out, as on the winged winds, they flew,
  And seized the distant goal with greedy view.
  Shot from the crowd, swift Nisus all o'er-passed;
  Nor storms, nor thunder, equal half his haste.
  The next, but, though the next, yet far disjoined,
  Came Salius, and Euryalus behind;
  Then Helymus, whom young Diores plied,
  Step after step, and almost side by side,
  His shoulders pressing--and, in longer space,
  Had won, or left at least a dubious race.
    Now, spent, the goal they almost reach at last,
  When eager Nisus, hapless in his haste,
  Slipped first, and, slipping, fell upon the plain,
  Soaked with the blood of oxen newly slain.
  The careless victor had not marked his way;
  But, treading where the treacherous puddle lay,
  His heels flew up; and on the grassy floor
  He fell, besmeared with filth and holy gore.
  Not mindless then, Euryalus, of thee,
  Nor of the sacred bonds of amity,
  He strove the immediate rival's hope to cross,
  And caught the foot of Salius as he rose:
  So Salius lay extended on the plain:
  Euryalus springs out, the prize to gain,
  And leaves the crowd:--applauding peals attend
  The victor to the goal, who vanquished by his friend.
  Next Helymus; and then Diores came,
  By two misfortunes made the third in fame.
    But Salius enters, and, exclaiming loud
  For justice, deafens and disturbs the crowd;
  Urges his cause may in the court be heard;
  And pleads the prize is wrongfully conferred.
  But favour for Euryalus appears;
  His blooming beauty, with his tender years,
  Had bribed the judges for the promised prize;
  Besides, Diores fills the court with cries,
  Who vainly reaches at the last reward,
  If the first palm on Salius be conferred.
  Then thus the prince: "Let no disputes arise:
  Where Fortune placed it, I award the prize.
  But Fortune's errors give me leave to mend,
  At least to pity my deserving friend"
  He said, and, from among the spoils, he draws
  (Ponderous with shaggy mane and golden paws)
  A lion's hide: to Salius this he gives:
  Nisus with envy sees the gift, and grieves.
  "If such rewards to vanquished men are due,
  (He said) and falling is to rise by you,
  What prize may Nisus from your bounty claim,
  Who merited the first rewards and fame?
  In falling, both an equal fortune tried;
  Would Fortune for my fall so well provide!"
  With this he pointed to his face, and showed
  His hands and all his habit smeared with blood.
  The indulgent father of the people smiled,
  And caused to be produced an ample shield,
  Of wondrous art, by Didymaon wrought,
  Long since from Neptune's bars in triumph brought.
  This given to Nisus, he divides the rest,
  And equal justice in his gifts expressed.
  The race thus ended, and rewards bestowed,
  Once more the prince bespeaks the attentive crowd:--
  "If there be here, whose dauntless courage dare
  In gauntlet fight, with limbs and body bare,
  His opposite sustain in open view,
  Stand forth the champion, and the games renew.
  Two prizes I propose, and thus divide--
  A bull with gilded horns, and fillets tied,
  Shall be the portion of the conquering chief:
  A sword and helm shall cheer the loser's grief."
    Then haughty Dares in the lists appears;
  Stalking he strides, his head erected bears:
  His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
  And loud applauses echo through the field.
  Dares alone in combat used to stand
  The match of mighty Paris, hand to hand;
  The same, at Hector's funerals, undertook
  Gigantic Butes, of the Amycian stock,
  And, by the stroke of his resistless hand,
  Stretched the vast bulk upon the yellow sand.
  Such Dares was; and such he strode along,
  And drew the wonder of the gazing throng.
  His brawny back and ample breast he shows;                  }
  His lifted arms around his head he throws,                  }
  And deals, in whistling air, his empty blows.               }
  His match is sought: but, through the trembling band,
  Not one dares answer to the proud demand.
  Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes
  Already he devours the promised prize.
  He claims the bull with awless insolence,
  And, having seized his horns, accosts the prince:--
  "If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
  How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?
  Permit me, chief, permit, without delay,
  To lead this uncontended gift away."
  The crowd assents, and, with redoubled cries,
  For the proud challenger demands the prize.
    Acestes, fired with just disdain, to see
  The palm usurped without a victory,
  Reproached Entellus thus, who sate beside,
  And heard and saw, unmoved, the Trojan's pride:--
  "Once, but in vain, a champion of renown,
  So tamely can you bear the ravished crown,
  A prize in triumph borne before your sight,
  And shun, for fear, the danger of the fight?
  Where is our Eryx now, the boasted name,
  The god, who taught your thundering arm the game?
  Where now your baffled honour? where the spoil
  That filled your house, and fame that filled our isle?"
  Entellus, thus:--"My soul is still the same,
  Unmoved with fear, and moved with martial fame;
  But my chill blood is curdled in my veins,
  And scarce the shadow of a man remains.
  Oh! could I turn to that fair prime again,
  That prime, of which this boaster is so vain,
  The brave, who this decrepit age defies,
  Should feel my force, without the promised prize."
  He said; and, rising at the word, he threw
  Two ponderous gauntlets down in open view--
  Gauntlets, which Eryx wont in fight to wield,
  And sheath his hands with, in the listed field.
  With fear and wonder seized, the crowd beholds
  The gloves of death, with seven distinguished folds
  Of tough bull-hides; the space within is spread
  With iron, or with loads of heavy lead:
  Dares himself was daunted at the sight,
  Renounced his challenge, and refused to fight.
  Astonished at their weight, the hero stands,
  And poised the ponderous engines in his hands.
  "What had your wonder (said Entellus) been,                 }
  Had you the gauntlets of Alcides seen,                      }
  Or viewed the stern debate on this unhappy green!           }
  These, which I bear, your brother Eryx bore,
  Still marked with battered brains and mingled gore.
  With these he long sustained the Herculean arm;
  And these I wielded while my blood was warm,
  This languished frame while better spirits fed,
  Ere age unstrung my nerves, or time o'ersnowed my head.
  But, if the challenger these arms refuse,
  And cannot wield their weight, or dare not use;
  If great Æneas and Acestes join
  In his request, these gauntlets I resign;
  Let us with equal arms perform the fight,
  And let him leave to fear, since I resign my right."
  This said, Entellus for the strife prepares;
  Stripped of his quilted coat, his body bares;
  Composed of mighty bones and brawn, he stands,
  A goodly towering object on the sands.
  Then just Æneas equal arms supplied,
  Which round their shoulders to their wrists they tied.
  Both on the tiptoe stand, at full extent,
  Their arms aloft, their bodies inly bent;
  Their heads from aiming blows they bear afar;
  With clashing gauntlets then provoke the war.
  One on his youth and pliant limbs relies;
  One on his sinews, and his giant size.
  The last is stiff with age, his motion slow;                }
  He heaves for breath, he staggers to and fro,               }
  And clouds of issuing smoke his nostrils loudly blow.       }
  Yet equal in success, they ward, they strike;
  Their ways are different, but their art alike.
  Before, behind, the blows are dealt; around
  Their hollow sides the rattling thumps resound.
  A storm of strokes, well meant, with fury flies,
  And errs about their temples, ears, and eyes--
  Nor always errs; for oft the gauntlet draws
  A sweeping stroke along the crackling jaws.
  Heavy with age, Entellus stands his ground,
  But with his warping body wards the wound.
  His hand and watchful eye keep even pace;
  While Dares traverses, and shifts his place,
  And, like a captain who beleaguers round
  Some strong-built castle on a rising ground,
  Views all the approaches with observing eyes;               }
  This and that other part in vain he tries,                  }
  And more on industry than force relies.                     }
  With hands on high, Entellus threats the foe;             }
  But Dares watched the motion from below,                  }
  And slipped aside, and shunned the long-descending blow.  }
  Entellus wastes his forces on the wind,
  And, thus deluded of the stroke designed,
  Headlong and heavy fell; his ample breast,
  And weighty limbs, his ancient mother pressed.
  So falls a hollow pine, that long had stood
  On Ida's height, or Erymanthus' wood,
  Torn from the roots. The differing nations rise;
  And shouts and mingled murmurs rend the skies.
  Acestes runs with eager haste, to raise
  The fallen companion of his youthful days.
  Dauntless he rose, and to the fight returned;
  With shame his glowing cheeks, his eyes with fury burned.
  Disdain and conscious virtue fired his breast,
  And with redoubled force his foe he pressed.
  He lays on load with either hand, amain,
  And headlong drives the Trojan o'er the plain;
  Nor stops, nor stays; nor rest nor breath allows;           }
  But storms of strokes descend about his brows,              }
  A rattling tempest, and a hail of blows.                    }
  But now the prince, who saw the wild increase             }
  Of wounds, commands the combatants to cease,              }
  And bounds Entellus' wrath, and bids the peace.           }
  First to the Trojan, spent with toil, he came,
  And soothed his sorrow for the suffered shame.
  "What fury seized my friend? The Gods, (said he)
  To him propitious, and averse to thee,
  Have given his arm superior force to thine.
  'Tis madness to contend with strength divine."
  The gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore
  His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
  His mouth and nostrils poured a purple flood,
  And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood.
  Faintly he staggered through the hissing throng,
  And hung his head, and trailed his legs along.
  The sword and casque are carried by his train;
  But with his foe the palm and ox remain.
    The champion, then, before Æneas came,
  Proud of his prize, but prouder of his fame:
  "O goddess-born, and you, Dardanian host,
  Mark with attention, and forgive my boast;
  Learn what I was, by what remains; and know,
  From what impending fate you saved my foe."
  Sternly he spoke, and then confronts the bull;              }
  And, on his ample forehead aiming full,                     }
  The deadly stroke, descending, pierced the skull.           }
  Down drops the beast, nor needs a second wound,
  But sprawls in pangs of death, and spurns the ground.
  Then, thus:--"In Dares's stead I offer this.
  Eryx! accept a nobler sacrifice:
  Take the last gift my withered arms can yield:
  The gauntlets I resign, and here renounce the field."
    This done, Æneas orders, for the close,
  The strife of archers, with contending bows.
  The mast, Sergestus' shattered galley bore,
  With his own hands he raises on the shore.
  A fluttering dove upon the top they tie,
  The living mark at which their arrows fly.
  The rival archers in a line advance,
  Their turn of shooting to receive from chance.
  A helmet holds their names: the lots are drawn;
  On the first scroll was read Hippocoon:
  The people shout. Upon the next was found
  Young Mnestheus, late with naval honours crowned.
  The third contained Eurytion's noble name,
  Thy brother, Pandarus, and next in fame,
  Whom Pallas urged the treaty to confound,
  And send among the Greeks a feathered wound.
  Acestes, in the bottom, last remained,
  Whom not his age from youthful sports restrained.
  Soon all with vigour bend their trusty bows,
  And from the quiver each his arrow chose.
  Hippocoon's was the first: with forceful sway
  It flew, and, whizzing, cut the liquid way.
  Fixed in the mast the feathered weapon stands:
  The fearful pigeon flutters in her bands,
  And the tree trembled, and the shouting cries
  Of the pleased people rend the vaulted skies.
  Then Mnestheus to the head his arrow drove,                 }
  With lifted eyes, and took his aim above,                   }
  But made a glancing shot, and missed the dove;              }
  Yet missed so narrow, that he cut the cord,
  Which fastened, by the foot, the flitting bird.
  The captive thus released, away she flies,
  And beats, with clapping wings, the yielding skies.
  His bow already bent, Eurytion stood;
  And, having first invoked his brother god,
  His winged shaft with eager haste he sped.
  The fatal message reached her as she fled:
  She leaves her life aloft; she strikes the ground,
  And renders back the weapon in the wound.
  Acestes, grudging at his lot, remains,
  Without a prize to gratify his pains.
  Yet, shooting upward, sends his shaft, to show
  An archer's art, and boast his twanging bow.
  The feathered arrow gave a dire portent,
  And latter augurs judge from this event.
  Chafed by the speed, it fired; and, as it flew,
  A trail of following flames, ascending drew:
  Kindling they mount, and mark the shiny way;                }
  Across the skies as falling meteors play,                   }
  And vanish into wind, or in a blaze decay.                  }
  The Trojans and Sicilians wildly stare,
  And, trembling, turn their wonder into prayer.
  The Dardan prince put on a smiling face,
  And strained Acestes with a close embrace;
  Then honouring him with gifts above the rest,
  Turned the bad omen, nor his fears confessed.
  "The gods (said he) this miracle have wrought,
  And ordered you the prize without the lot.
  Accept this goblet, rough with figured gold,
  Which Thracian Cisseus gave my sire of old:
  This pledge of ancient amity receive,
  Which to my second sire I justly give."
  He said, and, with the trumpet's cheerful sound,
  Proclaimed him victor, and with laurel crowned.
  Nor good Eurytion envied him the prize,
  Though he transfixed the pigeon in the skies.
  Who cut the line, with second gifts was graced;
  The third was his, whose arrow pierced the mast.
  The chief, before the games were wholly done,
  Called Periphantes, tutor to his son,
  And whispered thus:--"With speed Ascanius find;
  And, if his childish troop be ready joined,
  On horseback let him grace his grandsire's day,
  And lead his equals armed in just array."
  He said; and, calling out, the cirque he clears.
  The crowd withdrawn, an open plain appears.
  And now the noble youths, of form divine,                   }
  Advance before their fathers, in a line:                    }
  The riders grace the steeds; the steeds with glory shine.   }
    Thus marching on in military pride,
  Shouts of applause resound from side to side.
  Their casques adorned with laurel wreaths they wear,
  Each brandishing aloft a cornel spear.
  Some at their backs their gilded quivers bore;
  Their chains of burnished gold hung down before.
  Three graceful troops they formed upon the green;           }
  Three graceful leaders at their head were seen;             }
  Twelve followed every chief, and left a space between.      }
  The first young Priam led--a lovely boy,
  Whose grandsire was the unhappy king of Troy;
  (His race in after-times was known to fame,                 }
  New honours adding to the Latian name,)                     }
  And well the royal boy his Thracian steed became.           }
  White were the fetlocks of his feet before,
  And on his front a snowy star he bore.
  Then beauteous Atys, with Iülus bred,
  Of equal age, the second squadron led.
  The last in order, but the first in place,[105]
  First in the lovely features of his face,
  Rode fair Ascanius on a fiery steed,
  Queen Dido's gift, and of the Tyrian breed.
  Sure coursers for the rest the king ordains,
  With golden bits adorned, and purple reins.
    The pleased spectators peals of shouts renew,
  And all the parents in the children view;
  Their make, their motions, and their sprightly grace,
  And hopes and fears alternate in their face.
    The unfledged commanders, and their martial train,
  First make the circuit of the sandy plain
  Around their sires, and, at the appointed sign,
  Drawn up in beauteous order, form a line.
  The second signal sounds, the troop divides
  In three distinguished parts, with three distinguished guides.
  Again they close, and once again disjoin:
  In troop to troop opposed, and line to line.
  They meet; they wheel; they throw their darts afar,
  With harmless rage, and well-dissembled war.
  Then in a round the mingled bodies run:
  Flying they follow, and pursuing shun;
  Broken, they break; and, rallying, they renew
  In other forms the military show.
  At last, in order undiscerned they join,
  And march together in a friendly line.
  And, as the Cretan labyrinth of old,
  With wandering ways, and many a winding fold,
  Involved the weary feet, without redress,
  In a round error, which denied recess;
  So fought the Trojan boys in warlike play,
  Turned and returned, and still a different way.
  Thus dolphins, in the deep, each other chase
  In circles, when they swim around the watery race.
  This game, these carousals, Ascanius taught;
  And, building Alba, to the Latins brought,
  Shewed what he learned: the Latin sires impart
  To their succeeding sons the graceful art:
  From these imperial Rome received the game,
  Which Troy, the youths the Trojan troop, they name.
  Thus far the sacred sports they celebrate:
  But Fortune soon resumed her ancient hate;
  For, while they pay the dead his annual dues,
  Those envied rites Saturnian Juno views;
  And sends the goddess of the various bow,
  To try new methods of revenge below;
  Supplies the winds to wing her airy way,
  Where in the port secure the navy lay.
  Swiftly fair Iris down her arch descends,
  And, undiscerned, her fatal voyage ends.
  She saw the gathering crowd; and, gliding thence,
  The desert shore, and fleet without defence.
  The Trojan matrons, on the sands alone,
  With sighs and tears Anchises' death bemoan:
  Then, turning to the sea their weeping eyes,
  Their pity to themselves renews their cries.
  "Alas!" said one, "what oceans yet remain
  For us to sail! what labours to sustain!"
  All take the word, and, with a general groan,
  Implore the gods for peace, and places of their own.
  The goddess, great in mischief, views their pains,
  And in a woman's form her heavenly limbs restrains.
  In face and shape, old Beroë she became,                    }
  Doryclus' wife, a venerable dame,                           }
  Once blessed with riches, and a mother's name.              }
  Thus changed, amidst the crying crowd she ran,
  Mixed with the matrons, and these words began:--
  "O wretched we! whom not the Grecian power,
  Nor flames, destroyed, in Troy's unhappy hour!
  O wretched we! reserved by cruel Fate,
  Beyond the ruins of the sinking state!
  Now seven revolving years are wholly run,
  Since this improsperous voyage we begun;
  Since, tossed from shores to shores, from lands to lands,
  Inhospitable rocks and barren sands,
  Wandering in exile, through the stormy sea,
  We search in vain for flying Italy.
  Now cast by Fortune on this kindred land,                   }
  What should our rest and rising walls withstand,            }
  Or hinder here to fix our banished band?                    }
  O country lost, and gods redeemed in vain,
  If still in endless exile we remain!
  Shall we no more the Trojan walls renew,
  Or streams of some dissembled Simoïs view?
  Haste! join with me! the unhappy fleet consume!
  Cassandra bids; and I declare her doom.
  In sleep I saw her; she supplied my hands
  (For this I more than dreamt) with flaming brands:
  'With these, (said she,) these wandering ships destroy:     }
  These are your fatal seats, and this your Troy.'            }
  Time calls you now; the precious hour employ:               }
  Slack not the good presage, while heaven inspires
  Our minds to dare, and gives the ready fires.
  See! Neptune's altars minister their brands:
  The god is pleased; the god supplies our hands."
  Then, from the pile, a flaming fir she drew,
  And, tossed in air, amidst the galleys threw.
  Rapt in amaze, the matrons wildly stare:
  Then Pyrgo, reverenced for her hoary hair,
  Pyrgo, the nurse of Priam's numerous race,
  "No Beroë this, though she belies her face!
  What terrors from her frowning front arise!
  Behold a goddess in her ardent eyes!
  What rays around her heavenly face are seen!
  Mark her majestic voice, and more than mortal mien!
  Beroë but now I left, whom, pined with pain,
  Her age and anguish from these rites detain."
  She said. The matrons, seized with new amaze,
  Roll their malignant eyes, and on the navy gaze.
  They fear, and hope, and neither part obey:
  They hope the fated land, but fear the fatal way.
  The goddess, having done her task below,
  Mounts up on equal wings, and bends her painted bow.
  Struck with the sight, and seized with rage divine,
  The matrons prosecute their mad design:
  They shriek aloud; they snatch, with impious hands,
  The food of altars; firs and flaming brands,
  Green boughs and saplings, mingled in their haste,
  And smoking torches, on the ships they cast.
  The flame, unstopped at first, more fury gains,
  And Vulcan rides at large with loosened reins:
  Triumphant to the painted sterns he soars,
  And seizes, in his way, the banks and crackling oars.
  Eumelus was the first, the news to bear,
  While yet they crowd the rural theatre.
  Then, what they hear, is witnessed by their eyes:
  A storm of sparkles, and of flames, arise.
  Ascanius took the alarm, while yet he led
  His early warriors on his prancing steed,
  And, spurring on, his equals soon o'erpassed;
  Nor could his frighted friends reclaim his haste.
  Soon as the royal youth appeared in view,
  He sent his voice before him as he flew:--
  "What madness moves you, matrons! to destroy
  The last remainders of unhappy Troy?
  Not hostile fleets, but your own hopes, you burn,
  And on your friends your fatal fury turn.
  Behold your own Ascanius!"--While he said,                  }
  He drew his glittering helmet from his head,                }
  In which the youths to sportful arms he led.                }
  By this, Æneas and his train appear;
  And now the women, seized with shame and fear,
  Dispersed, to woods and caverns take their flight,
  Abhor their actions, and avoid the light;
  Their friends acknowledge, and their error find,
  And shake the goddess from their altered mind.
    Not so the raging fires their fury cease,
  But, lurking in the seams, with seeming peace,
  Work on their way amid the smouldering tow,
  Sure in destruction, but in motion slow.
  The silent plague through the green timber eats,
  And vomits out a tardy flame by fits.
  Down to the keels, and upward to the sails,
  The fire descends, or mounts, but still prevails;
  Nor buckets poured, nor strength of human hand,
  Can the victorious element withstand.
    The pious hero rends his robe, and throws
  To heaven his hands, and, with his hands, his vows.--
  "O Jove! (he cried,) if prayers can yet have place;
  If thou abhorr'st not all the Dardan race;
  If any spark of pity still remain;                          }
  If gods are gods, and not invoked in vain;                  }
  Yet spare the reliques of the Trojan train!                 }
  Yet from the flames our burning vessels free!
  Or let thy fury fall alone on me.
  At this devoted head thy thunder throw,
  And send the willing sacrifice below."
    Scarce had he said, when southern storms arise:
  From pole to pole the forky lightning flies;
  Loud rattling shakes the mountains and the plain;
  Heaven bellies downward, and descends in rain.
  Whole sheets of water from the clouds are sent,
  Which, hissing through the planks, the flames prevent
  And stop the fiery pest. Four ships alone
  Burn to the waist, and for the fleet atone.
    But doubtful thoughts the hero's heart divide,
  If he should still in Sicily reside,
  Forgetful of his fates,--or tempt the main,
  In hope the promised Italy to gain.
  Then Nautes, old and wise, to whom alone
  The will of heaven by Pallas was foreshown;
  Versed in portents, experienced, and inspired
  To tell events, and what the fates required--
  Thus while he stood, to neither part inclined,
  With cheerful words relieved his labouring mind:--
  "O goddess-born! resigned in every state,
  With patience bear, with prudence push, your fate.
  By suffering well, our fortune we subdue;
  Fly when she frowns, and, when she calls, pursue.
  Your friend Acestes is of Trojan kind;
  To him disclose the secrets of your mind:
  Trust in his hands your old and useless train,
  Too numerous for the ships which yet remain--
  The feeble, old, indulgent of their ease,
  The dames who dread the dangers of the seas,
  With all the dastard crew, who dare not stand
  The shock of battle with your foes by land.
  Here you may build a common town for all,
  And, from Acestes' name, Acesta call."
  The reasons, with his friend's experience joined,
  Encouraged much, but more disturbed, his mind.
  'Twas dead of night; when, to his slumbering eyes,
  His father's shade descended from the skies;
  And thus he spoke:--"O, more than vital breath,
  Loved while I lived, and dear even after death!
  O son, in various toils and troubles tossed!
  The king of heaven employs my careful ghost
  On his commands--the god, who saved from fire
  Your flaming fleet, and heard your just desire.
  The wholesome counsel of your friend receive,
  And here the coward train and women leave:
  The chosen youth, and those who nobly dare,
  Transport, to tempt the dangers of the war.
  The stern Italians will their courage try;
  Rough are their manners, and their minds are high.
  But first to Pluto's palace you shall go,
  And seek my shade among the blest below:
  For not with impious ghosts my soul remains,                }
  Nor suffers, with the damned, perpetual pains,              }
  But breathes the living air of soft Elysian plains.         }
  The chaste Sibylla shall your steps convey,
  And blood of offered victims free the way.
  There shall you know what realms the gods assign,
  And learn the fates and fortunes of your line.
  But now, farewell! I vanish with the night,                 }
  And feel the blast of heaven's approaching light."          }
  He said, and mixed with shades, and took his airy flight.-- }
  "Whither so fast?" the filial duty cried;
  "And why, ah! why the wished embrace denied?"
  He said, and rose: as holy zeal inspires,
  He rakes hot embers, and renews the fires;
  His country gods and Vesta then adores
  With cakes and incense, and their aid implores.
  Next, for his friends and royal host he sent,
  Revealed his vision, and the god's intent,
  With his own purpose.--All, without delay,
  The will of Jove, and his desires, obey.
  They list with women each degenerate name,
  Who dares not hazard life for future fame.
  These they cashier. The brave remaining few,
  Oars, banks, and cables, half consumed, renew.
  The prince designs a city with the plough:
  The lots their several tenements allow,
  This part is named from Ilium, that from Troy,
  And the new king ascends the throne with joy;
  A chosen senate from the people draws;
  Appoints the judges, and ordains the laws.
  Then, on the top of Eryx, they begin
  A rising temple to the Paphian queen.
  Anchises, last, is honoured as a god:                       }
  A priest is added, annual gifts bestowed,                   }
  And groves are planted round his blest abode.               }
  Nine days they pass in feasts, their temples crowned;
  And fumes of incense in the fanes abound.
  Then from the south arose a gentle breeze,
  That curled the smoothness of the glassy seas:
  The rising winds a ruffling gale afford,
  And call the merry mariners aboard.
    Now loud laments along the shores resound,
  Of parting friends in close embraces bound.
  The trembling women, the degenerate train,
  Who shunned the frightful dangers of the main,
  Even those desire to sail, and take their share
  Of the rough passage, and the promised war:
  Whom good Æneas cheers, and recommends
  To their new master's care his fearful friends.
  On Eryx' altars three fat calves he lays;                   }
  A lamb new-fallen to the stormy seas;                       }
  Then slips his halsers, and his anchors weighs.             }
  High on the deck the godlike hero stands,
  With olive crowned, a charger in his hands;
  Then cast the reeking entrails in the brine,
  And poured the sacrifice of purple wine.
  Fresh gales arise; with equal strokes they vie,
  And brush the buxom seas, and o'er the billows fly.
    Meantime the mother goddess, full of fears,
  To Neptune thus addressed, with tender tears:--
  "The pride of Jove's imperious queen, the rage,
  The malice, which no sufferings can assuage,
  Compel me to these prayers; since neither fate,
  Nor time, nor pity, can remove her hate.
  Even Jove is thwarted by his haughty wife;
  Still vanquished, yet she still renews the strife.
  As if 'twere little to consume the town
  Which awed the world, and wore the imperial crown,
  She prosecutes the ghost of Troy with pains,
  And gnaws, e'en to the bones, the last remains.
  Let her the causes of her hatred tell;
  But you can witness its effects too well.
  You saw the storm she raised on Libyan floods,
  That mixed the mounting billows with the clouds;
  When, bribing Æolus, she shook the main,
  And moved rebellion in your watery reign.
  With fury she possessed the Dardan dames,
  To burn their fleet with execrable flames,
  And forced Æneas, when his ships were lost,
  To leave his followers on a foreign coast.
  For what remains, your godhead I implore,
  And trust my son to your protecting power.
  If neither Jove's nor Fate's decree withstand,
  Secure his passage to the Latian land."
    Then thus the mighty Ruler of the Main:--
  "What may not Venus hope from Neptune's reign?
  My kingdom claims your birth; my late defence
  Of your endangered fleet may claim your confidence.
  Nor less by land than sea my deeds declare,
  How much your loved Æneas is my care.
  Thee, Xanthus! and thee, Simoïs! I attest--
  Your Trojan troops when proud Achilles pressed,
  And drove before him headlong on the plain,                 }
  And dashed against the walls the trembling train;           }
  When floods were filled with bodies of the slain;           }
  When crimson Xanthus, doubtful of his way,                }
  Stood up on ridges to behold the sea,                     }
  New heaps came tumbling in, and choked his way;           }
  When your Æneas fought, but fought with odds
  Of force unequal, and unequal gods;
  I spread a cloud before the victor's sight,
  Sustained the vanquished, and secured his flight--
  Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
  The vowed destruction of ungrateful Troy.
  My will's the same: fair goddess! fear no more,
  Your fleet shall safely gain the Latian shore;
  Their lives are given; one destined head alone
  Shall perish, and for multitudes atone."
  Thus having armed with hopes her anxious mind,
  His finny team Saturnian Neptune joined,
  Then adds the foamy bridle to their jaws,
  And to the loosened reins permits the laws.
  High on the waves his azure car he guides;                  }
  Its axles thunder, and the sea subsides,                    }
  And the smooth ocean rolls her silent tides.                }
  The tempests fly before their father's face,
  Trains of inferior gods his triumph grace,
  And monster whales before their master play,
  And choirs of Tritons crowd the watery way.
  The marshalled powers in equal troops divide                }
  To right and left; the gods his better side                 }
  Inclose; and, on the worse, the Nymphs and Nereids ride.    }
    Now smiling hope, with sweet vicissitude,
  Within the hero's mind his joys renewed.
  He calls to raise the masts, the sheets display;            }
  The cheerful crew with diligence obey;                      }
  They scud before the wind, and sail in open sea.            }
  A-head of all the master-pilot steers;
  And, as he leads, the following navy veers.
  The steeds of Night had travelled half the sky,
  The drowsy rowers on their benches lie,
  When the soft God of Sleep, with easy flight,
  Descends, and draws behind a trail of light.
  Thou, Palinurus, art his destined prey;
  To thee alone he takes his fatal way.
  Dire dreams to thee, and iron sleep, he bears;
  And, lighting on thy prow, the form of Phorbas wears.
  Then thus the traitor god began his tale:--                 }
  "The winds, my friend, inspire a pleasing gale;             }
  The ships, without thy care, securely sail.                 }
  Now steal an hour of sweet repose; and I
  Will take the rudder, and thy room supply."
  To whom the yawning pilot, half-asleep:--
  "Me dost thou bid to trust the treacherous deep,
  The harlot-smiles of her dissembling face,
  And to her faith commit the Trojan race?
  Shall I believe the Siren South again,
  And, oft betrayed, not know the monster main?"
  He said: his fastened hands the rudder keep,
  And, fixed on heaven, his eyes repel invading sleep.
  The god was wroth, and at his temples threw
  A branch in Lethe dipped, and drunk with Stygian dew:
  The pilot, vanquished by the power divine,
  Soon closed his swimming eyes, and lay supine.
  Scarce were his limbs extended at their length,
  The god, insulting with superior strength,
  Fell heavy on him, plunged him in the sea,
  And, with the stern, the rudder tore away.
  Headlong he fell, and, struggling in the main,
  Cried out for helping hands, but cried in vain.
  The victor Dæmon mounts obscure in air,
  While the ship sails without the pilot's care.
  On Neptune's faith the floating fleet relies;               }
  But what the man forsook, the god supplies,                 }
  And, o'er the dangerous deep, secure the navy flies;        }
  Glides by the Sirens' cliffs, a shelfy coast,
  Long infamous for ships and sailors lost,
  And white with bones. The impetuous ocean roars,
  And rocks rebellow from the sounding shores.
  The watchful hero felt the knocks; and found
  The tossing vessel sailed on shoaly ground.
  Sure of his pilot's loss, he takes himself
  The helm, and steers aloof, and shuns the shelf.
  Inly he grieved, and, groaning from the breast,
  Deplored his death; and thus his pain expressed:--
  "For faith reposed on seas, and on the flattering sky,
  Thy naked corpse is doomed on shores unknown to lie."


FOOTNOTES:

[104] A great part of this book is borrowed from Apollonius
Rhodius; and the reader may observe the great judgment and distinction
tion of our author, in what he borrows from the ancients, by comparing
them. I conceive the reason why he omits the horse-race in the funeral
games, was, because he shows Ascanius afterwards on horseback, with
his troops of boys, and would not wear that subject thread-bare, which
Statius, in the next age, described so happily. Virgil seems, to me,
to have excelled Homer in those sports, and to have laboured them the
more in honour of Octavius, his patron, who instituted the like games
for perpetuating the memory of his uncle Julius: piety, as Virgil calls
it, or dutifulness to parents, being a most popular virtue among the
Romans.

[105] Dr Carey reads _grace_; but Dryden here uses _place_,
for eminence of rank. Ascanius was the last in order, but the first in
dignity; this, by the way, is an Ovidian point superinduced upon the
simplicity of Virgil:

  _Extremus, formaque ante omnes pulcher, Iulus._




ÆNEÏS,


BOOK VI.

ARGUMENT.

 _The Sibyl foretels Æneas the adventures he should meet with in Italy.
 She attends him to hell; describing to him the various scenes of
 that place, and conducting him to his father Anchises, who instructs
 him in those sublime mysteries of the soul of the world, and the
 transmigration; and shews him that glorious race of heroes, which was
 to descend from him and his posterity._

  He said, and wept; then spread his sails before             }
  The winds, and reached at length the Cuman shore:           }
  Their anchors dropped, his crew the vessels moor.           }
  They turn their heads to sea, their sterns to land,
  And greet with greedy joy the Italian strand.
  Some strike from clashing flints their fiery seed;
  Some gather sticks, the kindled flames to feed,
  Or search for hollow trees, and fell the woods,
  Or trace through valleys the discovered floods.
  Thus while their several charges they fulfil,
  The pious prince ascends the sacred hill
  Where Phœbus is adored; and seeks the shade,
  Which hides from sight his venerable maid.
  Deep in a cave the Sibyl makes abode;
  Thence full of Fate returns, and of the god.
  Through Trivia's grove they walk; and now behold,
  And enter now, the temple roofed with gold.
  When Dædalus, to fly the Cretan shore,
  His heavy limbs on jointed pinions bore,
  (The first who sailed in air,) 'tis sung by Fame,           }
  To the Cumæan coast at length he came,                      }
  And, here alighting, built this costly frame.               }
  Inscribed to Phœbus, here he hung on high
  The steerage of his wings, that cut the sky:
  Then, o'er the lofty gate, his art embossed
  Androgeos' death, and (offerings to his ghost)
  Seven youths from Athens yearly sent, to meet
  The fate appointed by revengeful Crete.
  And next to these the dreadful urn was placed,
  In which the destined names by lots were cast:
  The mournful parents stand around in tears,
  And rising Crete against their shore appears.
  There too, in living sculpture, might be seen
  The mad affection of the Cretan queen;
  Then how she cheats her bellowing lover's eye;
  The rushing leap, the doubtful progeny--
  The lower part a beast, a man above--
  The monument of their polluted love.
  Nor far from thence he graved the wonderous maze,
  A thousand doors, a thousand winding ways:
  Here dwells the monster, hid from human view,
  Not to be found, but by the faithful clue;
  Till the kind artist, moved with pious grief,
  Lent to the loving maid this last relief,
  And all those erring paths described so well,
  That Theseus conquered, and the monster fell.
  Here hapless Icarus had found his part,
  Had not the father's grief restrained his art.
  He twice essayed to cast his son in gold;
  Twice from his hands he dropped the forming mould.
    All this with wondering eyes Æneas viewed:
  Each varying object his delight renewed.
  Eager to read the rest...Achates came,                      }
  And by his side the mad divining dame,                      }
  The priestess of the god, Deïphobe her name.                }
  "Time suffers not," she said, "to feed your eyes
  With empty pleasures; haste the sacrifice.
  Seven bullocks, yet unyoked, for Phœbus chuse,
  And for Diana seven unspotted ewes."
  This said, the servants urge the sacred rites,
  While to the temple she the prince invites.
  A spacious cave, within its farmost part,
  Was hewed and fashioned by laborious art,
  Through the hill's hollow sides: before the place,
  A hundred doors a hundred entries grace:
  As many voices issue, and the sound
  Of Sibyl's words as many times rebound.
  Now to the mouth they come. Aloud she cries,--
  "This is the time! inquire your destinies!
  He comes! behold the god!" Thus while she said,
  (And shivering at the sacred entry staid,)
  Her colour changed; her face was not the same,
  And hollow groans from her deep spirit came.
  Her hair stood up; convulsive rage possessed
  Her trembling limbs, and heaved her labouring breast.
  Greater than human kind she seemed to look,
  And, with an accent more than mortal, spoke.
  Her staring eyes with sparkling fury roll,
  When all the god came rushing on her soul.
  Swiftly she turned, and, foaming as she spoke,--
  "Why this delay?" she cried--"the powers invoke.
  Thy prayers alone can open this abode;
  Else vain are my demands, and dumb the god."
  She said no more. The trembling Trojans hear,
  O'er-spread with a damp sweat, and holy fear.
  The prince himself, with awful dread possessed,
  His vows to great Apollo thus addressed:--
  "Indulgent god! propitious power to Troy,
  Swift to relieve, unwilling to destroy!
  Directed by whose hand, the Dardan dart
  Pierced the proud Grecian's only mortal part!
  Thus far, by Fate's decrees and thy commands,
  Through ambient seas and through devouring sands,
  Our exiled crew has sought the Ausonian ground;
  And now, at length, the flying coast is found.
  Thus far the fate of Troy, from place to place,
  With fury has pursued her wandering race.
  Here cease, ye powers, and let your vengeance end:
  Troy is no more, and can no more offend.
  And thou, O sacred maid, inspired to see
  The event of things in dark futurity!
  Give me, what heaven has promised to my fate,
  To conquer and command the Latian state;
  To fix my wandering gods, and find a place
  For the long exiles of the Trojan race.
  Then shall my grateful hands a temple rear
  To the twin gods, with vows and solemn prayer;
  And annual rites, and festivals, and games,
  Shall be performed to their auspicious names.
  Nor shalt thou want thy honours in my land;
  For there thy faithful oracles shall stand,
  Preserved in shrines; and every sacred lay,
  Which, by thy mouth, Apollo shall convey--
  All shall be treasured by a chosen train
  Of holy priests, and ever shall remain.
  But, oh! commit not thy prophetic mind
  To flitting leaves, the sport of every wind,
  Lest they disperse in air our empty fate;
  Write not, but, what the powers ordain, relate."
    Struggling in vain, impatient of her load,
  And labouring underneath the ponderous god,
  The more she strove to shake him from her breast,
  With more and far superior force he pressed;
  Commands his entrance, and, without controul,
  Usurps her organs, and inspires her soul.
  Now, with a furious blast, the hundred doors                }
  Ope of themselves; a rushing whirlwind roars                }
  Within the cave, and Sibyl's voice restores:--              }
  "Escaped the dangers of the watery reign,
  Yet more and greater ills by land remain.
  The coast, so long desired, (nor doubt the event,)
  Thy troops shall reach, but, having reached, repent.
  Wars, horrid wars, I view--a field of blood,
  And Tyber rolling with a purple flood.
  Simoïs nor Xanthus shall be wanting there:
  A new Achilles shall in arms appear,
  And he, too, goddess-born. Fierce Juno's hate,
  Added to hostile force, shall urge thy fate.
  To what strange nations shalt not thou resort,
  Driven to solicit aid at every court!
  The cause the same which Ilium once oppressed--
  A foreign mistress, and a foreign guest.
  But thou, secure of soul, unbent with woes,
  The more thy fortune frowns, the more oppose.
  The dawnings of thy safety shall be shown,
  From, whence thou least shall hope, a Grecian town."
    Thus, from the dark recess, the Sibyl spoke,              }
  And the resisting air the thunder broke;                    }
  The cave rebellowed, and the temple shook.                  }
  The ambiguous god, who ruled her labouring breast,        }
  In these mysterious words his mind expressed;             }
  Some truths revealed, in terms involved the rest.         }
  At length her fury fell, her foaming ceased,
  And, ebbing in her soul, the god decreased.
  Then thus the chief:--"No terror to my view,
  No frightful face of danger, can be new.
  Inured to suffer, and resolved to dare,
  The Fates, without my power, shall be without my care.
  This let me crave--since near your grove the road           }
  To hell lies open, and the dark abode,                      }
  Which Acheron surrounds, the innavigable flood--            }
  Conduct me through the regions void of light,
  And lead me longing to my father's sight.
  For him, a thousand dangers I have sought,                  }
  And, rushing where the thickest Grecians fought,            }
  Safe on my back the sacred burden brought.                  }
  He, for my sake, the raging ocean tried,                  }
  And wrath of heaven, (my still auspicious guide,)         }
  And bore, beyond the strength decrepit age supplied.      }
  Oft, since he breathed his last, in dead of night,
  His reverend image stood before my sight;
  Enjoined to seek, below, his holy shade--
  Conducted there by your unerring aid.
  But you, if pious minds by prayers are won,
  Oblige the father, and protect the son.
  Yours is the power; nor Proserpine in vain
  Has made you priestess of her nightly reign.
  If Orpheus, armed with his enchanting lyre,
  The ruthless king with pity could inspire,
  And from the shades below redeem his wife;
  If Pollux, offering his alternate life,
  Could free his brother, and can daily go
  By turns aloft, by turns descend below;--
  Why name I Theseus, or his greater friend,
  Who trod the downward path, and upward could ascend?
  Not less than theirs, from Jove my lineage came;
  My mother greater, my descent the same."
  So prayed the Trojan prince, and, while he prayed,
  His hand upon the holy altar laid.
  Then thus replied the prophetess divine:--
  "O goddess-born, of great Anchises' line!
  The gates of hell are open night and day;
  Smooth the descent, and easy is the way:
  But, to return, and view the cheerful skies--
  In this the task and mighty labour lies.
  To few great Jupiter imparts this grace,
  And those of shining worth, and heavenly race.
  Betwixt those regions and our upper light,
  Deep forests and impenetrable night
  Possess the middle space: the infernal bounds
  Cocytus, with his sable waves, surrounds.
  But, if so dire a love your soul invades,
  As twice below to view the trembling shades;
  If you so hard a toil will undertake,
  As twice to pass the innavigable lake;
  Receive my counsel. In the neighbouring grove
  There stands a tree; the queen of Stygian Jove
  Claims it her own; thick woods and gloomy night
  Conceal the happy plant from human sight.
  One bough it bears; but (wonderous to behold!)
  The ductile rind and leaves of radiant gold:
  This from the vulgar branches must be torn,
  And to fair Proserpine the present borne,
  Ere leave be given to tempt the nether skies.               }
  The first thus rent, a second will arise,                   }
  And the same metal the same room supplies.                  }
  Look round the wood, with lifted eyes, to see
  The lurking gold upon the fatal tree:
  Then rend it off, as holy rites command;
  The willing metal will obey thy hand,
  Following with ease, if, favoured by thy fate,
  Thou art foredoomed to view the Stygian state:
  If not, no labour can the tree constrain;
  And strength of stubborn arms, and steel, are vain.
  Besides, you know not, while you here attend,
  The unworthy fate of your unhappy friend:
  Breathless he lies; and his unburied ghost,
  Deprived of funeral rites, pollutes your host.
  Pay first his pious dues; and, for the dead,
  Two sable sheep around his hearse be led;
  Then, living turfs upon his body lay:                       }
  This done, securely take the destined way,                  }
  To find the regions destitute of day."                      }
  She said, and held her peace.--Æneas went                 }
  Sad from the cave, and full of discontent,                }
  Unknowing whom the sacred Sibyl meant.                    }
  Achates, the companion of his breast,
  Goes grieving by his side, with equal cares oppressed.
  Walking, they talked, and fruitlessly divined,
  What friend the priestess by those words designed.
  But soon they found an object to deplore:
  Misenus lay extended on the shore--
  Son of the god of winds:--none so renowned,
  The warrior trumpet in the field to sound,
  With breathing brass to kindle fierce alarms,
  And rouse to dare their fate in honourable arms.
  He served great Hector, and was ever near,
  Not with his trumpet only, but his spear.
  But, by Pelides' arms when Hector fell,
  He chose Æneas; and he chose as well.
  Swoln with applause, and aiming still at more,
  He now provokes the sea-gods from the shore.
  With envy, Triton heard the martial sound,
  And the bold champion, for his challenge, drowned;
  Then cast his mangled carcase on the strand:--
  The gazing crowd around the body stand.
  All weep; but most Æneas mourns his fate,
  And hastens to perform the funeral state.
  In altar-wise, a stately pile they rear;
  The basis broad below, and top advanced in air.
  An ancient wood, fit for the work designed,
  (The shady covert of the savage kind,)
  The Trojans found: the sounding axe is plied;
  Firs, pines, and pitch trees, and the towering pride
  Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
  And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
  Huge trunks of trees, felled from the steepy crown
  Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down.
  Armed like the rest the Trojan prince appears,
  And, by his pious labour, urges theirs.
  Thus while he wrought, revolving in his mind
  The ways to compass what his wish designed,
  He cast his eyes upon the gloomy grove,
  And then with vows implored the queen of love:--
  "O! may thy power, propitious still to me,
  Conduct my steps to find the fatal tree,
  In this deep forest; since the Sibyl's breath
  Foretold, alas! too true, Misenus' death."
  Scarce had he said, when, full before his sight,            }
  Two doves, descending from their airy flight,               }
  Secure upon the grassy plain alight.                        }
  He knew his mother's birds; and thus he prayed:--
  "Be you my guides, with your auspicious aid,
  And lead my footsteps, till the branch be found,
  Whose glittering shadow gilds the sacred ground.
  And thou, great parent! with celestial care,
  In this distress, be present to my prayer."
  Thus having said, he stopped, with watchful sight,
  Observing still the motions of their flight,
  What course they took, what happy signs they shew.          }
  They fed, and, fluttering, by degrees withdrew              }
  Still farther from the place, but still in view:            }
  Hopping and flying thus, they led him on
  To the slow lake, whose baleful stench to shun,
  They winged their flight aloft, then, stooping low,
  Perched on the double tree, that bears the golden bough.
  Through the green leaves the glittering shadows glow;
  As, on the sacred oak, the wintery misletoe,
  Where the proud mother views her precious brood;
  And happier branches, which she never sowed.
  Such was the glittering; such the ruddy rind,
  And dancing leaves, that wantoned in the wind.
  He seized the shining bough with griping hold,
  And rent away, with ease, the lingering gold,
  Then to the Sibyl's palace bore the prize.                  }
  Meantime, the Trojan troops, with weeping eyes,             }
  To dead Misenus pay his obsequies.                          }
  First, from the ground, a lofty pile they rear,
  Of pitch-trees, oaks, and pines, and unctuous fir:
  The fabric's front with cypress twigs they strew,
  And stick the sides with boughs of baleful yew.
  The topmost part his glittering arms adorn;
  Warm waters, then, in brazen cauldrons borne,
  Are poured to wash his body, joint by joint,
  And fragrant oils the stiffened limbs anoint.
  With groans and cries Misenus they deplore;
  Then on a bier, with purple covered o'er,
  The breathless body, thus bewailed, they lay,               }
  And fire the pile, their faces turned away:                 }
  (Such reverent rites their fathers used to pay.)            }
  Pure oil and incense on the fire they throw,
  And fat of victims, which his friends bestow.
  These gifts the greedy flames to dust devour;
  Then, on the living coals, red wine they pour;
  And, last, the reliques by themselves dispose,
  Which in a brazen urn the priests inclose.
  Old Corynæus compassed thrice the crew,
  And dipped an olive-branch in holy dew;
  Which thrice he sprinkled round, and thrice aloud
  Invoked the dead, and then dismissed the crowd.
    But good Æneas ordered on the shore                       }
  A stately tomb, whose top a trumpet bore,                   }
  A soldier's faulchion, and a seaman's oar.                  }
  Thus was his friend interred; and deathless fame
  Still to the lofty cape consigns his name.
    These rites performed, the prince, without delay,
  Hastes, to the nether world, his destined way.
  Deep was the cave; and, downward as it went
  From the wide mouth, a rocky rough descent;
  And here the access a gloomy grove defends,
  And here the innavigable lake extends,
  O'er whose unhappy waters, void of light,
  No bird presumes to steer his airy flight;
  Such deadly stenches from the depth arise,
  And steaming sulphur, that infects the skies.
  From hence the Grecian bards their legends make,
  And give the name Avernus to the lake.
  Four sable bullocks, in the yoke untaught,
  For sacrifice the pious hero brought.
  The priestess pours the wine betwixt their horns;
  Then cuts the curling hair; that first oblation burns,
  Invoking Hecat hither to repair--
  A powerful name in hell and upper air.
  The sacred priests, with ready knives, bereave
  The beasts of life, and in full bowls receive
  The streaming blood: a lamb to Hell and Night
  (The sable wool without a streak of white)
  Æneas offers; and, by Fate's decree,
  A barren heifer, Proserpine, to thee.
  With holocausts he Pluto's altar fills:
  Seven brawny bulls with his own hand he kills:
  Then, on the broiling entrails, oil he pours;
  Which, ointed thus, the raging flame devours.
  Late the nocturnal sacrifice begun,
  Nor ended, till the next returning sun.
  Then earth began to bellow, trees to dance,
  And howling dogs in glimmering light advance,
  Ere Hecat came.--"Far hence be souls prophane!"
  The Sibyl cryed--"and from the grove abstain!
  Now, Trojan, take the way thy fates afford;
  Assume thy courage, and unsheath thy sword."
  She said, and passed along the gloomy space;
  The prince pursued her steps with equal pace.
     Ye realms, yet unrevealed to human sight
  Ye gods, who rule the regions of the night!
  Ye gliding ghosts! permit me to relate
  The mystic wonders of your silent state.
    Obscure they went through dreary shades, that led
  Along the waste dominions of the dead.
  Thus wander travellers in woods by night,
  By the moon's doubtful and malignant light,
  When Jove in dusky clouds involves the skies,
  And the faint crescent shoots by fits before their eyes.
    Just in the gate, and in the jaws of hell,
  Revengeful Cares and sullen Sorrows dwell,
  And pale Diseases, and repining Age,
  Want, Fear, and Famine's unresisted rage;
  Here Toils, and Death, and Deaths half-brother, Sleep,
  (Forms terrible to view) their centry keep;
  With anxious Pleasures of a guilty mind,
  Deep Frauds before, and open Force behind;
  The Furies' iron beds; and Strife, that shakes
  Her hissing tresses, and unfolds her snakes.
  Full in the midst of this infernal road,
  An elm displays her dusky arms abroad:
  The god of sleep there hides his heavy head,
  And empty dreams on every leaf are spread.
  Of various forms unnumbered spectres more,
  Centaurs, and double shapes, besiege the door.
  Before the passage, horrid Hydra stands,
  And Briareus with all his hundred hands;
  Gorgons, Geryon with his triple frame;
  And vain Chimæra vomits empty flame.
  The chief unsheathed his shining steel, prepared,
  Though seized with sudden fear, to force the guard,
  Offering his brandished weapon at their face;
  Had not the Sibyl stopped his eager pace,
  And told him what those empty phantoms were--
  Forms without bodies, and impassive air.
  Hence to deep Acheron they take their way,
  Whose troubled eddies, thick with ooze and clay,
  Are whirled aloft, and in Cocytus lost:
  There Charon stands, who rules the dreary coast--
  A sordid god: down from his hoary chin
  A length of beard descends, uncombed, unclean:
  His eyes, like hollow furnaces on fire;
  A girdle, foul with grease, binds his obscene attire.
  He spreads his canvas; with his pole he steers;
  The freights of flitting ghosts in his thin bottom bears.
  He looked in years; yet, in his years, were seen
  A youthful vigour, and autumnal green.
  An airy crowd came rushing where he stood,
  Which filled the margin of the fatal flood--
  Husbands and wives, boys and unmarried maids,
  And mighty heroes' more majestic shades,
  And youths, entombed before their father's eyes,
  With hollow groans, and shrieks, and feeble cries.
  Thick as the leaves in autumn strow the woods,
  Or fowls, by winter forced, forsake the floods,
  And wing their hasty flight to happier lands--              }
  Such, and so thick, the shivering army stands,              }
  And press for passage with extended hands.                  }
    Now these, now those, the surly boatman bore:
  The rest he drove to distance from the shore.
  The hero, who beheld, with wondering eyes,
  The tumult mixed with shrieks, laments, and cries,
  Asked of his guide, what the rude concourse meant?
  Why to the shore the thronging people bent?
  What forms of law among the ghosts were used?
  Why some were ferried o'er, and some refused?
  "Son of Anchises! offspring of the gods!
  (The Sibyl said) you see the Stygian floods,
  The sacred streams, which heaven's imperial state
  Attests in oaths, and fears to violate.
  The ghosts rejected are the unhappy crew
  Deprived of sepulchres and funeral due:
  The boatman, Charon; those, the buried host,
  He ferries over to the farther coast;
  Nor dares his transport vessel cross the waves
  With such whose bones are not composed in graves.
  A hundred years they wander on the shore;
  At length, their penance done, are wafted o'er."
  The Trojan chief his forward pace repressed,
  Revolving anxious thoughts within his breast.
  He saw his friends, who, whelmed beneath the waves;
  Their funeral honours claimed, and asked their quiet graves.
  The lost Leucaspis in the crowd he knew,
  And the brave leader of the Lycian crew,
  Whom, on the Tyrrhene seas, the tempests met;
  The sailors mastered, and the ship o'erset.
  Amidst the spirits, Palinurus pressed,
  Yet fresh from life, a new-admitted guest,
  Who, while he steering viewed the stars, and bore
  His course from Afric to the Latian shore,
  Fell headlong down. The Trojan fixed his view,
  And scarcely through the gloom the sullen shadow knew.
  Then thus the prince:--"What envious power, O friend!
  Brought your loved life to this disastrous end?
  For Phœbus, ever true in all he said,
  Has, in your fate alone, my faith betrayed.
  The god foretold you should not die, before
  You reached, secure from seas, the Italian shore.
  Is this the unerring power?"--The ghost replied:
  "Nor Phœbus flattered, nor his answers lied;
  Nor envious gods have sent me to the deep:                  }
  But, while the stars and course of heaven I keep,           }
  My wearied eyes were seized with fatal sleep.               }
  I fell; and, with my weight, the helm constrained
  Was drawn along, which yet my gripe retained.
  Now by the winds and raging waves I swear,
  Your safety, more than mine, was then my care;
  Lest, of the guide bereft, the rudder lost,
  Your ship should run against the rocky coast.
  Three blustering nights, borne by the southern blast,
  I floated, and discovered land at last:
  High on a mounting wave, my head I bore,
  Forcing my strength, and gathering to the shore.
  Panting, but past the danger, now I seized
  The craggy cliffs, and my tired members eased.
  While, cumbered with my dropping clothes, I lay,
  The cruel nation, covetous of prey,
  Stained with my blood the unhospitable coast;
  And now, by winds and waves, my lifeless limbs are tossed:
  Which, O! avert, by yon etherial light,
  Which I have lost for this eternal night:
  Or, if by dearer ties you may be won,
  By your dead sire, and by your living son,
  Redeem from this reproach my wandering ghost.
  Or with your navy seek the Velin coast,
  And in a peaceful grave my corpse compose;
  Or, if a nearer way your mother shows,
  (Without whose aid, you durst not undertake
  This frightful passage o'er the Stygian lake,)
  Lend to this wretch your hand, and waft him o'er
  To the sweet banks of yon forbidden shore."
  Scarce had he said; the prophetess began:--
  "What hopes delude thee, miserable man?
  Think'st thou, thus unintombed, to cross the floods,        }
  To view the Furies and infernal gods,                       }
  And visit, without leave, the dark abodes?                  }
  Attend the term of long revolving years;
  Fate, and the dooming gods, are deaf to tears.[106]
  This comfort of thy dire misfortune take--
  The wrath of heaven, inflicted for thy sake,
  With vengeance shall pursue the inhuman coast,
  Till they propitiate thy offended ghost,
  And raise a tomb, with vows and solemn prayer;
  And Palinurus' name the place shall bear."
  This calmed his cares; soothed with his future fame,
  And pleased to hear his propagated name.
    Now nearer to the Stygian lake they draw:
  Whom, from the shore, the surly boatman saw;
  Observed their passage through the shady wood,
  And marked their near approaches to the flood:
  Then thus he called aloud, inflamed with wrath:--
  "Mortal, whate'er, who this forbidden path
  In arms presum'st to tread! I charge thee, stand,
  And tell thy name, and business in the land.
  Know, this the realm of night--the Stygian shore:
  My boat conveys no living bodies o'er;
  Nor was I pleased great Theseus once to bear,
  (Who forced a passage with his pointed spear,)
  Nor strong Alcides--men of mighty fame,
  And from the immortal gods their lineage came.
  In fetters one the barking porter tied,                     }
  And took him trembling from his sovereign's side:           }
  Two sought by force to seize his beauteous bride."          }
  To whom the Sibyl thus:--"Compose thy mind;
  Nor frauds are here contrived, nor force designed.
  Still may the dog the wandering troops constrain            }
  Of airy ghosts, and vex the guilty train,                   }
  And with her grisly lord his lovely queen remain.           }
  The Trojan chief, whose lineage is from Jove,             }
  Much famed for arms, and more for filial love,            }
  Is sent to seek his sire in your Elysian grove.           }
  If neither piety, nor heaven's command,
  Can gain his passage to the Stygian strand,
  This fatal present shall prevail, at least"--
  Then shewed the shining bough, concealed within her vest.
  No more was needful: for the gloomy god
  Stood mute with awe, to see the golden rod;
  Admired the destined offering to his queen--
  A venerable gift, so rarely seen.
  His fury thus appeased, he puts to land;
  The ghosts forsake their seats at his command:
  He clears the deck, receives the mighty freight;
  The leaky vessel groans beneath the weight.
  Slowly she[107] sails, and scarcely stems the tides;
  The pressing water pours within her sides.
  His passengers at length are wafted o'er,
  Exposed, in muddy weeds, upon the miry shore.
  No sooner landed, in his den they found
  The triple porter of the Stygian sound,
  Grim Cerberus, who soon began to rear
  His crested snakes, and armed his bristling hair.
  The prudent Sibyl had before prepared
  A sop, in honey steeped, to charm the guard;
  Which, mixed with powerful drugs, she cast before
  His greedy grinning jaws, just oped to roar.
  With three enormous mouths he gapes; and straight,
  With hunger pressed, devours the pleasing bait.
  Long draughts of sleep his monstrous limbs enslave;
  He reels, and, falling, fills the spacious cave.
  The keeper charmed, the chief without delay
  Passed on, and took the irremeable way.
  Before the gates, the cries of babes new born,
  Whom Fate had from their tender mothers torn,
  Assault his ears: then those, whom form of laws
  Condemned to die, when traitors judged their cause.
  Nor want they lots, nor judges to review
  The wrongful sentence, and award a new.
  Minos, the strict inquisitor, appears;
  And lives and crimes, with his assessors, hears.
  Round, in his urn, the blended balls he rolls,
  Absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls.
  The next, in place and punishment, are they
  Who prodigally throw their souls away--[108]
  Fools, who, repining at their wretched state,
  And loathing anxious life, suborned their fate.
  With late repentance, now they would retrieve
  The bodies they forsook, and wish to live;
  Their pains and poverty desire to bear,
  To view the light of heaven, and breathe the vital air:
  But Fate forbids; the Stygian floods oppose,
  And, with nine circling streams, the captive souls inclose.
    Not far from thence, the Mournful Fields appear,
  So called from lovers that inhabit there.
  The souls, whom that unhappy flame invades,
  In secret solitude and myrtle shades
  Make endless moans, and, pining with desire,
  Lament too late their unextinguished fire.
  Here Procris, Eriphyle here he found
  Baring her breast, yet bleeding with the wound
  Made by her son. He saw Pasiphaë there,
  With Phædra's ghost, a foul incestuous pair.
  There Laodamia, with Evadne, moves--
  Unhappy both, but loyal in their loves:
  Cæneus, a woman once, and once a man,
  But ending in the sex she first began.
  Not far from these Phœnician Dido stood,
  Fresh from her wound, her bosom bathed in blood;
  Whom when the Trojan hero hardly knew,
  Obscure in shades, and with a doubtful view,
  (Doubtful as he who sees, through dusky night,
  Or thinks he sees, the moon's uncertain light,)
  With tears he first approached the sullen shade;
  And, as his love inspired him, thus he said;--
  "Unhappy queen! then is the common breath
  Of rumour true, in your reported death,
  And I, alas! the cause?--By heaven, I vow,
  And all the powers that rule the realms below,
  Unwilling I forsook your friendly state,
  Commanded by the gods, and forced by Fate--
  Those gods, that Fate, whose unresisted might               }
  Have sent me to these regions void of light                 }
  Through the vast empire of eternal night.                   }
  Nor dared I to presume, that, pressed with grief,
  My flight should urge you to this dire relief.
  Stay, stay your steps, and listen to my vows!
  'Tis the last interview that Fate allows!"
  In vain he thus attempts her mind to move
  With tears and prayers, and late-repenting love.
  Disdainfully she looked; then turning round,
  But fixed her eyes unmoved upon the ground,
  And, what he says and swears, regards no more,
  Than the deaf rocks, when the loud billows roar;
  But whirled away, to shun his hateful sight,
  Hid in the forest, and the shades of night;
  Then sought Sichæus through the shady grove,
  Who answered all her cares, and equalled all her love.
  Some pious tears the pitying hero paid,
  And followed with his eyes the flitting shade,
  Then took the forward way, by Fate ordained,                }
  And, with his guide, the farther fields attained,           }
  Where, severed from the rest, the warrior souls remained.   }
  Tydeus he met, with Meleager's race,                      }
  The pride of armies, and the soldiers' grace;             }
  And pale Adrastus with his ghastly face.                  }
  Of Trojan chiefs he viewed a numerous train,
  All much lamented, all in battle slain--
  Glaucus and Medon, high above the rest,
  Antenor's sons, and Ceres' sacred priest.
  And proud Idæus, Priam's charioteer,
  Who shakes his empty reins, and aims his airy spear.
  The gladsome ghosts, in circling troops, attend,
  And with unwearied eyes behold their friend;
  Delight to hover near, and long to know
  What business brought him to the realms below.
    But Argive chiefs, and Agamemnon's train,
  When his refulgent arms flashed through the shady plain,
  Fled from his well known face, with wonted fear,            }
  As when his thundering sword and pointed spear              }
  Drove headlong to their ships, and gleaned the routed rear. }
  They raised a feeble cry, with trembling notes;
  But the weak voice deceived their gasping throats.
  Here Priam's son, Deïphobus, he found,
  Whose face and limbs were one continued wound.
  Dishonest, with lopped arms, the youth appears,
  Spoiled of his nose, and shortened of his ears.
  He scarcely knew him, striving to disown
  His blotted form, and blushing to be known;
  And therefore first began:--"O Teucer's race!                 }
  Who durst thy faultless figure thus deface?                   }
  What heart could wish, what hand inflict, this dire disgrace? }
  'Twas famed, that, in our last and fatal night,
  Your single prowess long sustained the fight,
  Till, tired, not forced, a glorious fate you chose,
  And fell upon a heap of slaughtered foes.
  But, in remembrance of so brave a deed,
  A tomb and funeral honours I decreed;
  Thrice called your manes on the Trojan plains:
  The place your armour and your name retains.
  Your body too I sought, and, had I found,
  Designed for burial in your native ground."
    The ghost replied:--"Your piety has paid
  All needful rites, to rest my wandering shade:
  But cruel Fate, and my more cruel wife,
  To Grecian swords betrayed my sleeping life.
  These are the monuments of Helen's love--
  The shame I bear below, the marks I bore above.
  You know in what deluding joys we past
  The night, that was by heaven decreed our last.
  For, when the fatal horse, descending down,
  Pregnant with arms, o'erwhelmed the unhappy town,
  She feigned nocturnal orgies; left my bed,
  And, mixed with Trojan dames, the dances led;
  Then, waving high her torch, the signal made,
  Which roused the Grecians from their ambuscade.
  With watching overworn, with cares oppressed,               }
  Unhappy I had laid me down to rest,                         }
  And heavy sleep my weary limbs possessed.                   }
  Meantime my worthy wife our arms mislaid,
  And, from beneath my head, my sword conveyed;
  The door unlatched, and, with repeated calls,
  Invites her former lord within my walls.
  Thus in her crime her confidence she placed,
  And with new treasons would redeem the past.
  What need I more? Into the room they ran,
  And meanly murdered a defenceless man.
  Ulysses, basely born, first led the way.--                  }
  Avenging powers! with justice if I pray,                    }
  That fortune be their own another day!--                    }
  But answer you; and in your turn relate,
  What brought you, living, to the Stygian state.
  Driven by the winds and errors of the sea,                  }
  Or did you heaven's superior doom obey?                     }
  Or tell what other chance conducts your way,                }
  To view, with mortal eyes, our dark retreats,
  Tumults and torments of the infernal seats."
    While thus, in talk, the flying hours they pass,
  The sun had finished more than half his race:
  And they, perhaps, in words and tears had spent
  The little time of stay which heaven had lent:
  But thus the Sibyl chides their long delay:--
  "Night rushes down, and headlong drives the day:
  'Tis here, in different paths, the way divides;
  The right to Pluto's golden palace guides;
  The left to that unhappy region tends,                      }
  Which to the depth of Tartarus descends--                   }
  The seat of night profound, and punished fiends."           }
  Then thus Deïphobus:--"O sacred maid!
  Forbear to chide, and be your will obeyed.
  Lo! to the secret shadows I retire,
  To pay my penance till my years expire.[109]
  Proceed, auspicious prince, with glory crowned,
  And born to better fates than I have found."
  He said; and, while he said, his steps he turned
  To secret shadows, and in silence mourned.
  The hero, looking on the left, espied
  A lofty tower, and strong on every side
  With treble walls, which Phlegethon surrounds,                }
  Whose fiery flood the burning empire bounds;                  }
  And, pressed betwixt the rocks, the bellowing noise resounds. }
  Wide is the fronting gate, and, raised on high
  With adamantine columns, threats the sky.
  Vain is the force of man, and heaven's as vain,
  To crush the pillars which the pile sustain.
  Sublime on these a tower of steel is reared;
  And dire Tysiphone there keeps the ward,
  Girt in her sanguine gown, by night and day,
  Observant of the souls that pass the downward way.
  From hence are heard the groans of ghosts, the pains
  Of sounding lashes, and of dragging chains.
  The Trojan stood astonished at their cries,
  And asked his guide, from whence those yells arise;
  And what the crimes, and what the tortures were,
  And loud laments, that rent the liquid air.
  She thus replied:--"The chaste and holy race
  Are all forbidden this polluted place.
  But Hecat, when she gave to rule the woods,                 }
  Then led me trembling through these dire abodes,            }
  And taught the tortures of the avenging gods.               }
  These are the realms of unrelenting Fate;
  And awful Rhadamanthus rules the state.
  He hears and judges each committed crime;
  Inquires into the manner, place, and time.
  The conscious wretch must all his acts reveal,
  (Loth to confess, unable to conceal,)
  From the first moment of his vital breath,
  To his last hour of unrepenting death.
  Straight, o'er the guilty ghost, the Fury shakes            }
  The sounding whip, and brandishes her snakes,               }
  And the pale sinner, with her sisters, takes.               }
  Then, of itself, unfolds the eternal door;
  With dreadful sounds the brazen hinges roar.
  You see before the gate, what stalking ghost
  Commands the guard, what centries keep the post.
  More formidable Hydra stands within,
  Whose jaws with iron teeth severely grin.
  The gaping gulf low to the centre lies,
  And twice as deep, as earth is distant from the skies.
  The rivals of the gods, the Titan race,
  Here, singed with lightning, roll within the unfathomed space.
  Here lie the Aloëan twins, (I saw them both,)
  Enormous bodies, of gigantic growth,
  Who dared in fight the Thunderer to defy,
  Affect his heaven, and force him from the sky.
  Salmoneus, suffering cruel pains, I found,
  For emulating Jove with rattling sound
  Of mimic thunder, and the glittering blaze
  Of pointed lightnings, and their forky rays.
  Through Elis, and the Grecian towns, he flew:
  The audacious wretch four fiery coursers drew:
  He waved a torch aloft, and, madly vain,
  Sought god-like worship from a servile train.
  Ambitious fool! with horny hoofs to pass
  O'er hollow arches of resounding brass,
  To rival thunder in its rapid course,
  And imitate inimitable force!
  But he, the king of heaven, obscure on high,
  Bared his red arm, and, launching from the sky
  His writhen bolt, not shaking empty smoke,
  Down to the deep abyss the flaming felon struck.
  There Tityus was to see, who took his birth
  From heaven, his nursing from the foodful earth.
  Here his gigantic limbs, with large embrace,
  Infold nine acres of infernal space.
  A ravenous vulture, in his opened side,
  Her crooked beak and cruel talons tried;
  Still for the growing liver digged his breast;
  The growing liver still supplied the feast;
  Still are his entrails fruitful to their pains:
  The immortal hunger lasts, the immortal food remains.
  Ixion and Pirithoüs I could name,
  And more Thessalian chiefs of mighty fame.
  High o'er their heads a mouldering rock is placed,
  That promises a fall, and shakes at every blast.
  They lie below, on golden beds displayed;
  And genial feasts with regal pomp are made.
  The queen of Furies by their sides is set,
  And snatches from their mouths the untasted meat,
  Which if they touch, her hissing snakes she rears,
  Tossing her torch, and thundering in their ears.
  Then they, who brothers' better claim disown,
  Expel their parents, and usurp the throne;
  Defraud their clients, and, to lucre sold,
  Sit brooding on unprofitable gold--
  Who dare not give, and even refuse to lend,
  To their poor kindred, or a wanting friend--
  Vast is the throng of these; nor less the train
  Of lustful youths, for foul adultery slain--
  Hosts of deserters, who their honour sold,
  And basely broke their faith for bribes of gold.
  All these within the dungeon's depth remain,
  Despairing pardon, and expecting pain.
  Ask not what pains; nor farther seek to know
  Their process, or the forms of law below.
  Some roll a mighty stone; some, laid along,
  And bound with burning wires, on spokes of wheels are hung.
  Unhappy Theseus, doomed for ever there,
  Is fixed by Fate on his eternal chair:
  And wretched Phlegyas warns the world with cries,           }
  (Could warning make the world more just or wise,)           }
  'Learn righteousness, and dread the avenging deities.'      }
  To tyrants others have their country sold,
  Imposing foreign lords, for foreign gold:
  Some have old laws repealed, new statutes made,
  Not as the people pleased, but as they paid.
  With incest some their daughters' bed profaned.
  All dared the worst of ills, and, what they dared, attained.
  Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues,
  And throats of brass, inspired with iron lungs,
  I could not half those horrid crimes repeat,
  Nor half the punishments those crimes have met.
  But let us haste our voyage to pursue:
  The walls of Pluto's palace are in view;
  The gate, and iron arch above it, stands,
  On anvils laboured by the Cyclops' hands.
  Before our farther way the Fates allow,
  Here must we fix on high the golden bow."
  She said: and through the gloomy shades they past,
  And chose the middle path.--Arrived at last,
  The prince, with living water, sprinkled o'er
  His limbs and body; then approached the door,
  Possessed the porch, and on the front above
  He fixed the fatal bough, required by Pluto's love.
  These holy rites performed, they took their way,
  Where long extended plains of pleasure lay;
  The verdant fields with those of heaven may vie,
  With æther vested, and a purple sky--
  The blissful seats of happy souls below:
  Stars of their own, and their own suns, they know:
  Their airy limbs in sports they exercise,
  And, on the green, contend the wrestler's prize.
  Some, in heroic verse, divinely sing;
  Others in artful measures lead the ring.
  The Thracian bard, surrounded by the rest,
  There stands conspicuous in his flowing vest.
  His flying fingers, and harmonious quill,
  Strike seven distinguished notes, and seven at once they fill.
  Here found they Teucer's old heroic race,
  Born better times and happier years to grace.
  Assaracus and Ilus here enjoy
  Perpetual fame, with him who founded Troy.
  The chief beheld their chariots from afar,
  Their shining arms, and coursers trained to war.
  Their lances fixed in earth, their steeds around,
  Free from their harness, graze the flowery ground.
  The love of horses which they had, alive,
  And care of chariots, after death survive.
  Some cheerful souls were feasting on the plain;
  Some did the song, and some the choir, maintain,
  Beneath a laurel shade, where mighty Po
  Mounts up to woods above, and hides his head below.
  Here patriots live, who, for their country's good,
  In fighting-fields, were prodigal of blood:
  Priests of unblemished lives here make abode,
  And poets worthy their inspiring god;
  And searching wits, of more mechanic parts,
  Who graced their age with new-invented arts;
  Those, who to worth their bounty did extend,
  And those who knew that bounty to commend.
  The heads of these with holy fillets bound,
  And all their temples were with garlands crowned.
    To these the Sibyl thus her speech addressed,             }
  And first to him surrounded by the rest--                   }
  Towering his height, and ample was his breast:--            }
  "Say, happy souls! divine Musæus! say,
  Where lives Anchises, and where lies our way
  To find the hero, for whose only sake
  We sought the dark abodes, and crossed the bitter lake?"
  To this the sacred poet thus replied:--
  "In no fixed place the happy souls reside.
  In groves we live, and lie on mossy beds,
  By crystal streams, that murmur through the meads:
  But pass yon easy hill, and thence descend;
  The path conducts you to your journey's end."
  This said, he led them up the mountain's brow,              }
  And shews them all the shining fields below.                }
  They wind the hill, and through the blissful meadows go.    }
  But old Anchises, in a flowery vale,
  Reviewed his mustered race, and took the tale--
  Those happy spirits, which, ordained by Fate,
  For future being and new bodies wait--
  With studious thought observed the illustrious throng,
  In Nature's order as they passed along--
  Their names, their fates, their conduct, and their care,
  In peaceful senates, and successful war.
  He, when Æneas on the plain appears,
  Meets him with open arms, and falling tears.--
  "Welcome," he said, "the gods' undoubted race!              }
  O long expected to my dear embrace!                         }
  Once more 'tis given me to behold your face!                }
  The love and pious duty which you pay,
  Have passed the perils of so hard a way.
  'Tis true, computing times, I now believed
  The happy day approached; nor are my hopes deceived.
  What length of lands, what oceans have you passed,
  What storms sustained, and on what shores been cast!
  How have I feared your fate! but feared it most,
  When love assailed you on the Libyan coast."
  To this, the filial duty thus replies:--                    }
  "Your sacred ghost, before my sleeping eyes,                }
  Appeared, and often urged this painful enterprize.          }
  After long tossing on the Tyrrhene sea,
  My navy rides at anchor in the bay.
  But reach your hand, oh parent shade! nor shun
  The dear embraces of your longing son!"
  He said; and falling tears his face bedew:
  Then thrice around his neck his arms he threw;
  And thrice the fleeting shadow slipped away,
  Like winds, or empty dreams, that fly the day.
  Now, in a secret vale, the Trojan sees                       }
  A separate grove, through which a gentle breeze              }
  Plays with a passing breath, and whispers through the trees: }
  And, just before the confines of the wood,
  The gliding Lethe leads her silent flood.
  About the boughs an airy nation flew,
  Thick as the humming bees, that hunt the golden dew
  In summer's heat; on tops of lilies feed,
  And creep within their bells, to suck the balmy seed:
  The winged army roams the field around;
  The rivers and the rocks remurmur to the sound.
  Æneas wondering stood, then asked the cause,
  Which to the stream the crowding people draws.
  Then thus the sire:--"The souls that throng the flood
  Are those, to whom, by Fate, are other bodies owed:
  In Lethe's lake they long oblivion taste,
  Of future life secure, forgetful of the past.
  Long has my soul desired this time and place,
  To set before your sight your glorious race,
  That this presaging joy may fire your mind,
  To seek the shores by destiny designed."--
  "O father! can it be, that souls sublime
  Return to visit our terrestrial clime,
  And that the generous mind, released by death,
  Can covet lazy limbs, and mortal breath?"
  Anchises then, in order, thus begun
  To clear those wonders to his godlike son:--
  "Know, first, that heaven, and earth's compacted frame,
  And flowing waters, and the starry flame,
  And both the radiant lights,[110] one common soul
  Inspires and feeds, and animates the whole.
  This active mind, infused through all the space,
  Unites and mingles with the mighty mass.
  Hence men and beasts the breath of life obtain,
  And birds of air, and monsters of the main.
  The etherial vigour is in all the same,
  And every soul is filled with equal flame--
  As much as earthy limbs, and gross allay                    }
  Of mortal members subject to decay,                         }
  Blunt not the beams of heaven and edge of day.              }
  From this coarse mixture of terrestrial parts,
  Desire and fear by turns possess their hearts,
  And grief, and joy; nor can the grovelling mind,            }
  In the dark dungeon of the limbs confined,                  }
  Assert the native skies, or own its heavenly kind:          }
  Nor death itself can wholly wash their stains;
  But long-contracted filth even in the soul remains.
  The reliques of inveterate vice they wear,
  And spots of sin obscene in every face appear.
  For this are various penances enjoined;
  And some are hung to bleach upon the wind,
  Some plunged in waters, others purged in fires,
  Till all the dregs are drained, and all the rust expires.
  All have their manes, and those manes bear:                 }
  The few, so cleansed, to these abodes repair,               }
  And breathe, in ample fields, the soft Elysian air.         }
  Then are they happy, when by length of time
  The scurf is worn away, of each committed crime;
  No speck is left of their habitual stains,
  But the pure æther of the soul remains.
  But, when a thousand rolling years are past,
  (So long their punishments and penance last,)
  Whole droves of minds are, by the driving god,
  Compelled to drink the deep Lethæan flood,
  In large forgetful draughts to steep the cares
  Of their past labours, and their irksome years,
  That, unremembering of its former pain,
  The soul may suffer mortal flesh again."
  Thus having said, the father spirit leads
  The priestess and his son through swarms of shades,
  And takes a rising ground, from thence to see
  The long procession of his progeny.--
  "Survey (pursued the sire) this airy throng,
  As, offered to thy view, they pass along.
  These are the Italian names, which Fate will join
  With ours, and graff upon the Trojan line.
  Observe the youth who first appears in sight,
  And holds the nearest station to the light,
  Already seems to snuff the vital air,
  And leans just forward on a shining spear:
  Silvius is he, thy last-begotten race,
  But first in order sent, to fill thy place--
  An Alban name, but mixed with Dardan blood;
  Born in the covert of a shady wood,
  Him fair Lavinia, thy surviving wife,
  Shall breed in groves, to lead a solitary life.
  In Alba he shall fix his royal seat,
  And, born a king, a race of kings beget;--
  Then Procas, honour of the Trojan name,
  Capys, and Numitor, of endless fame.
  A second Silvius after these appears;
  Silvius Æneas, for thy name he bears;
  For arms and justice equally renowned,
  Who, late restored, in Alba shall be crowned.
  How great they look! how vigorously they wield
  Their weighty lances, and sustain the shield!
  But they, who crowned with oaken wreaths appear,
  Shall Gabian walls and strong Fidena rear;
  Nomentum, Bola, with Pometia, found;
  And raise Collatian towers on rocky ground.
  All these shall then be towns of mighty fame,
  Though now they lie obscure, and lands without a name.
  See Romulus the great, born to restore
  The crown that once his injured grandsire wore.
  This prince a priestess of our blood shall bear,
  And like his sire in arms he shall appear.
  Two rising crests his royal head adorn;
  Born from a god, himself to godhead born,
  His sire already signs him for the skies,
  And marks his seat amidst the deities.
  Auspicious chief! thy race, in times to come,
  Shall spread the conquests of imperial Rome--
  Rome, whose ascending towers shall heaven invade,
  Involving earth and ocean in her shade;
  High as the mother of the gods in place,
  And proud, like her, of an immortal race.
  Then, when in pomp she makes the Phrygian round,
  With golden turrets on her temples crowned;
  A hundred gods her sweeping train supply,
  Her offspring all, and all command the sky.
  Now fix your sight, and stand intent, to see
  Your Roman race, and Julian progeny.
  The mighty Cæsar waits his vital hour,
  Impatient for the world, and grasps his promised power.
  But next behold the youth of form divine--
  Cæsar himself, exalted in his line--
  Augustus, promised oft, and long foretold,                  }
  Sent to the realm that Saturn ruled of old;                 }
  Born to restore a better age of gold.                       }
  Afric and India shall his power obey;                     }
  He shall extend his propagated sway                       }
  Beyond the solar year, without the starry way,            }
  Where Atlas turns the rolling heavens around,
  And his broad shoulders with their lights are crowned.
  At his foreseen approach, already quake
  The Caspian kingdoms and Mæotian lake.
  Their seers behold the tempest from afar;
  And threatening oracles denounce the war.
  Nile hears him knocking at his sevenfold gates,
  And seeks his hidden spring, and fears his nephew's fates.
  Nor Hercules more lands or labours knew,
  Not though the brazen-footed hind he slew,
  Freed Erymanthus from the foaming boar,
  And dipped his arrows in Lernæan gore;
  Nor Bacchus, turning from his Indian war,
  By tygers drawn triumphant in his car,
  From Nysa's top descending on the plains,
  With curling vines around his purple reins.
  And doubt we yet through dangers to pursue
  The paths of honour, and a crown in view?
  But what's the man, who from afar appears,
  His head with olive crowned, his hand a censer bears?
  His hoary beard and holy vestments bring
  His lost idea back: I know the Roman king.
  He shall to peaceful Rome new laws ordain,
  Called from his mean abode, a sceptre to sustain.
  Him Tullus next in dignity succeeds,
  An active prince, and prone to martial deeds.
  He shall his troops for fighting-fields prepare,
  Disused to toils, and triumphs of the war.
  By dint of sword his crown he shall increase,
  And scour his armour from the rust of peace.
  Whom Ancus follows, with a fawning air,
  But vain within, and proudly popular.
  Next view the Tarquin kings, the avenging sword
  Of Brutus, justly drawn, and Rome restored.
  He first renews the rods and axe severe,
  And gives the consuls royal robes to wear.
  His sons, who seek the tyrant to sustain,
  And long for arbitrary lords again,
  With ignominy scourged in open sight,
  He dooms to death deserved, asserting public right.
  Unhappy man! to break the pious laws
  Of nature, pleading in his children's cause!
  Howe'er the doubtful fact is understood,                    }
  'Tis love of honour, and his country's good:                }
  The consul, not the father, sheds the blood.                }
  Behold Torquatus the same track pursue;
  And, next, the two devoted Decii view--
  The Drusian line, Camillus loaded home
  With standards well redeemed, and foreign foes o'ercome.
  The pair you see in equal armour shine,
  Now, friends below, in close embraces join;
  But, when they leave the shady realms of night,
  And, clothed in bodies, breathe your upper light,
  With mortal hate each other shall pursue;
  What wars, what wounds, what slaughter shall ensue!
  From Alpine heights the father first descends;              }
  His daughter's husband in the plain attends:                }
  His daughter's husband arms his eastern friends.            }
  Embrace again, my sons! be foes no more;
  Nor stain your country with her children's gore!
  And thou, the first, lay down thy lawless claim,
  Thou, of my blood, who bear'st the Julian name![111]
  Another comes, who shall in triumph ride,
  And to the Capitol his chariot guide,
  From conquered Corinth, rich with Grecian spoils.
  And yet another, famed for warlike toils,
  On Argos shall impose the Roman laws,
  And, on the Greeks, revenge the Trojan cause;
  Shall drag in chains their Achillean race;                  }
  Shall vindicate his ancestors' disgrace,                    }
  And Pallas, for her violated place.                         }
  Great Cato there, for gravity renowned,[112]
  And conquering Cossus goes with laurels crowned.
  Who can omit the Gracchi? who declare
  The Scipios' worth, those thunderbolts of war,
  The double bane of Carthage? Who can see,
  Without esteem for virtuous poverty,
  Severe Fabricius, or can cease to admire
  The ploughman consul in his coarse attire?
  Tired as I am, my praise the Fabii claim;
  And thou, great hero, greatest of thy name,
  Ordained in war to save the sinking state,
  And, by delays, to put a stop to fate!
  Let others better mould the running mass                    }
  Of metals, and inform the breathing brass,                  }
  And soften into flesh a marble face;                        }
  Plead better at the bar; describe the skies,
  And when the stars descend, and when they rise.
  But, Rome! 'tis thine alone, with awful sway,               }
  To rule mankind, and make the world obey,                   }
  Disposing peace and war thy own majestic way;               }
  To tame the proud, the fettered slave to free:--
  These are imperial arts, and worthy thee."
  He paused--and, while with wondering eyes they viewed
  The passing spirits, thus his speech renewed:--
  "See great Marcellus! how, untired in toils,
  He moves with manly grace, how rich with regal spoils!
  He, when his country (threatened with alarms)
  Requires his courage and his conquering arms,
  Shall more than once the Punic bands affright;
  Shall kill the Gaulish king in single fight;
  Then to the Capitol in triumph move,
  And the third spoils shall grace Feretrian Jove."
  Æneas here beheld, of form divine,
  A godlike youth in glittering armour shine,
  With great Marcellus keeping equal pace;
  But gloomy were his eyes, dejected was his face.
  He saw, and, wondering, asked his airy guide,
  What and of whence was he, who pressed the hero's side?
  "His son, or one of his illustrious name?
  How like the former, and almost the same!
  Observe the crowds that compass him around;
  All gaze, and all admire, and raise a shouting sound:
  But hovering mists around his brows are spread,
  And night, with sable shades, involves his head."
  "Seek not to know (the ghost replied with tears)
  The sorrows of thy sons in future years.
  This youth (the blissful vision of a day)
  Shall just be shown on earth, and snatched away.
  The gods too high had raised the Roman state,
  Were but their gifts as permanent as great.
  What groans of men shall fill the Martian Field!
  How fierce a blaze his flaming pile shall yield!
  What funeral pomp shall floating Tyber see,
  When, rising from his bed, he views the sad solemnity!
  No youth shall equal hopes of glory give,
  No youth afford so great a cause to grieve.
  The Trojan honour, and the Roman boast,
  Admired when living, and adored when lost!
  Mirror of ancient faith in early youth!
  Undaunted worth, inviolable truth!
  No foe, unpunished, in the fighting-field
  Shall dare thee, foot to foot, with sword and shield,
  Much less in arms oppose thy matchless force,
  When thy sharp spurs shall urge thy foaming horse.
  Ah! couldst thou break through Fate's severe decree,
  A new Marcellus shall arise in thee![113]
  Full canisters of fragrant lilies bring,
  Mixed with the purple roses of the spring;
  Let me with funeral flowers his body strow;                 }
  This gift which parents to their children owe,              }
  This unavailing gift, at least, I may bestow!"              }
  Thus having said, he led the hero round
  The confines of the blest Elysian ground;
  Which when Anchises to his son had shown,
  And fired his mind to mount the promised throne,
  He tells the future wars, ordained by Fate;
  The strength and customs of the Latian state;
  The prince, and people; and fore-arms his care
  With rules, to push his fortune, or to bear.
    Two gates the silent house of Sleep adorn;
  Of polished ivory this, that of transparent horn;[114]
  True visions through transparent horn arise;
  Through polished ivory pass deluding lies.
  Of various things discoursing as he passed,
  Anchises hither bends his steps at last.
  Then, through the gate of ivory, he dismissed
  His valiant offspring, and divining guest.
  Straight to the ships Æneas took his way,                   }
  Embarked his men, and skimmed along the sea,                }
  Still coasting, till he gained Caieta's bay.                }
  At length on oozy ground his galleys moor;
  Their heads are turned to sea, their sterns to shore.


FOOTNOTES:

[106] This blunder I do not venture to transfer from the
poet to the printer, with Dr Carey, who reads _prayers_. But Dryden's
rhymes are in general exceedingly accurate; and many of the examples
to the contrary, quoted by Dr Carey, only seem less so to us, by
the fluctuation of the mode of pronouncing. I strongly believe, for
example, that the word _sea_ was formerly pronounced somewhat like
_say_; for all the poets, down to Pope inclusive, make it rhyme to
_way_, _array_, &c.

[107] Early editions, _he_.

[108] Note I.

[109] Note II.

[110] Note III.

[111] Note V.

[112] Note IV.

[113] Note VI.

[114] Note VII.




NOTES

ON

ÆNEÏS, BOOK VI.


Note I.

  The next, in place and punishment, are they,
  Who prodigally throw their souls away, &c.--P. 405.

  _Proxima sorte tenent mœsti loca, qui sibi letum
  Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi,
  Projecere animas_, &c.

This was taken, amongst many other things, from the tenth book of
_Plato de Republicâ:_ no commentator, besides Fabrini, has taken
notice of it. Self-murder was accounted a great crime by that divine
philosopher; but the instances which he brings are too many to be
inserted in these short notes. Sir Robert Howard, in his translation
of this Æneïd, which was printed with his poems in the year 1660, has
given us the most learned and the most judicious observations on this
book, which are extant in our language.


Note II.

  _Lo! to the secret shadows I retire,
  To pay my penance till my years expire._--P. 409.

These two verses in English seem very different from the Latin--

  _Discedam; explebo numerum, reddarque tenebris._

Yet they are the sense of Virgil; at least, according to the common
interpretation of this place--"I will withdraw from your company,
retire to the shades, and perform my penance of a thousand years."
But I must confess, the interpretation of those two words, _explebo
numerum_, is somewhat violent, if it be thus understood, _minuam
numerum_; that is, I will lessen your company by my departure: for
Deïphobus, being a ghost, can hardly be said to be of their number.
Perhaps the poet means by _explebo numerum, absolvam sententiam;_ as
if Deïphobus replied to the Sibyl, who was angry at his long visit, "I
will only take my last leave of Æneas, my kinsman and my friend, with
one hearty good wish for his health and welfare, and then leave you to
prosecute your voyage." That wish is expressed in the words immediately
following, _I, decus, i, nostrum_, &c. which contain a direct answer to
what the Sibyl said before, when she upbraided their long discourse,
_nos flendo ducimus horas_. This conjecture is new, and therefore left
to the discretion of the reader.


Note III.

  Know, first, that heaven, and earth's compacted frame,
  And flowing waters, and the starry flame,
  And both the radiant lights, &c.--P. 416.

  _Principio cælum, et terras, camposque liquentes,
  Lucentemque globum lunæ, Titaniaque astra_, &c.

Here the sun is not expressed, but the moon only, though a less, and
also a less radiant, light. Perhaps the copies of Virgil are all
false, and that, instead of _Titaniaque astra_, he writ, _Titaniaque,
et astra_; and according to these words I have made my translation.
It is most certain, that the sun ought not to be omitted; for he is
frequently called the life and soul of the world: and nothing bids so
fair for a visible divinity to those who know no better, than that
glorious luminary. The Platonists call God the archetypal sun, and the
sun the visible deity, the inward vital spirit in the centre of the
universe, or that body to which that spirit is united, and by which
it exerts itself most powerfully. Now it was the received hypothesis
amongst the Pythagoreans, that the sun was situate in the centre of the
world. Plato had it from them, and was himself of the same opinion, as
appears by a passage in the _Timæus;_ from which noble dialogue is this
part of Virgil's poem taken.


Note IV.

  Great Cato there, for gravity renowned, &c.--P. 421.

  _Quis te, magne Cato_, &c.

There is no question but Virgil here means Cato Major, or the censor.
But the name of Cato being also mentioned in the Eighth Æneïd, I doubt
whether he means the same man in both places. I have said in the
preface, that our poet was of republican principles; and have given
this for one reason of my opinion, that he praised Cato in that line,

  _Secretosque pios, his dantem jura Catonem_--

and accordingly placed him in the Elysian fields. Montaigne thinks
this was Cato the Utican, the great enemy of arbitrary power, and a
professed foe to Julius Cæsar. Ruæus would persuade us that Virgil
meant the censor. But why should the poet name Cato twice, if he
intended the same person? Our author is too frugal of his words and
sense, to commit tautologies in either. His memory was not likely
to betray him into such an error. Nevertheless I continue in the
same opinion concerning the principles of our poet. He declares them
sufficiently in this book, where he praises the first Brutus for
expelling the Tarquins, giving liberty to Rome, and putting to death
his own children, who conspired to restore tyranny. He calls him only
an unhappy man, for being forced to that severe action--

  _Infelix! utcunque ferent ea facta minores,
  Vincet amor patriæ, laudumque immensa cupido._

Let the reader weigh these two verses, and he must be convinced that
I am in the right, and that I have not much injured my master in my
translation of them.


Note V.

  _Embrace again, my sons! be foes no more;
  Nor stain your country with her children's gore.
  And thou, the first, lay down thy lawless claim,
  Thou of my blood, who bear'st the Julian name._--P. 420.

This note, which is out of its proper place, I deferred on purpose, to
place it here, because it discovers the principles of our poet more
plainly than any of the rest.

  _Tuque prior, tu parce, genus qui ducis Olympo:
  Projice tela manu, sanguis meus!_

Anchises here speaks to Julius Cæsar, and commands him first to
lay down his arms; which is a plain condemnation of his cause. Yet
observe our poet's incomparable address; for, though he shews himself
sufficiently to be a commonwealth's man, yet, in respect to Augustus,
who was his patron, he uses the authority of a parent, in the person
of Anchises, who had more right to lay this injunction on Cæsar than
on Pompey, because the latter was not of his blood. Thus our author
cautiously veils his own opinion, and takes sanctuary under Anchises;
as if that ghost would have laid the same command on Pompey also, had
he been lineally descended from him. What could be more judiciously
contrived, when this was the Æneïd which he chose to read before his
master?


Note VI.

  _A new Marcellus shall arise in thee._--P. 423.

In Virgil thus:

  _Tu Marcellus eris_.

How unpoetically and badly had this been translated, _Thou shalt
Marcellus be_! Yet some of my friends were of opinion, that I mistook
the sense of Virgil in my translation. The French interpreter observes
nothing on this place, but that it appears by it, the mourning of
Octavia was yet fresh for the loss of her son Marcellus, whom she had
by her first husband, and who died in the year _ab urbe conditâ_, 731;
and collects from thence, that Virgil, reading this Æneïd before her in
the same year, had just finished it; that, from this time to that of
the poet's death, was little more than four years; so that, supposing
him to have written the whole Æneïs in eleven years, the first six
books must have taken up seven of those years; on which account, the
six last must of necessity be less correct.

Now, for the false judgment of my friends, there is but this little
to be said for them; the words of Virgil, in the verse preceding, are
these,

  ----_Siquâ fata aspera rumpas_--

as if the poet had meant, "if you break through your hard destiny, so
as to be born, you shall be called Marcellus:" but this cannot be the
sense; for, though Marcellus was born, yet he broke not through those
hard decrees, which doomed him to so immature a death. Much less can
Virgil mean, "you shall be the same Marcellus by the transmigration of
his soul:" for, according to the system of our author, a thousand years
must be first elapsed, before the soul can return into a human body:
but the first Marcellus was slain in the second Punic war; and how
many hundred years were yet wanting to the accomplishing his penance,
may with ease be gathered, by computing the time betwixt Scipio and
Augustus. By which it is plain, that Virgil cannot mean the same
Marcellus; but one of his descendants, whom I call a new Marcellus, who
so much resembled his ancestor, perhaps in his features and his person,
but certainly in his military virtues, that Virgil cries out, _quantum
instar in ipso est!_ which I have translated,

  How like the former, and almost the same!


Note VII.

  _Two gates the silent house of Sleep adorn;
  Of polished ivory this, that of transparent horn._--P. 423.

Virgil borrowed this imagination from Homer, Odysses xix. line 562.
The translation gives the reason, why true prophetic dreams are said
to pass through the gate of horn, by adding the epithet _transparent_,
which is not in Virgil, whose words are only these:

  _Sunt geminæ Somni portæ, quarum altera fertur
  Cornea_----

What is pervious to the sight is clear; and (alluding to this property)
the poet infers such dreams are of divine revelation. Such as pass
through the ivory gate, are of the contrary nature--polished lies. But
there is a better reason to be given; for the ivory alludes to the
teeth, the horn to the eyes. What we see is more credible, than what we
only hear; that is, words that pass through the portal of the mouth, or
"_hedge of the teeth_;" which is Homer's expression for _speaking_.




ÆNEÏS,


BOOK VII.

ARGUMENT.

 _King Latinus entertains Æneas, and promises him his only daughter,
 Lavinia, the heiress of his crown. Turnus, being in love with her,
 favoured by her mother, and stirred up by Juno and Alecto, breaks the
 treaty which was made, and engages in his quarrel Mezentius, Camilla,
 Messapus, and many other of the neighbouring princes; whose forces,
 and the names of their commanders, are particularly related._


  And thou, O matron of immortal fame!
  Here dying, to the shore hast left thy name;
  Caieta still the place is called from thee,
  The nurse of great Æneas' infancy.
  Here rest thy bones in rich Hesperia's plains;
  Thy name ('tis all a ghost can have) remains.
    Now, when the prince her funeral rites had paid,
  He ploughed the Tyrrhene seas with sails displayed.
  From land a gentle breeze arose by night,                   }
  Serenely shone the stars, the moon was bright,              }
  And the sea trembled with her silver light.                 }
  Now near the shelves of Circe's shores they run,
  (Circe the rich, the daughter of the Sun,)
  A dangerous coast!--The goddess wastes her days
  In joyous songs; the rocks resound her lays.
  In spinning, or the loom, she spends the night,
  And cedar brands supply her father's light.
  From hence were heard, rebellowing to the main,
  The roars of lions that refuse the chain,
  The grunts of bristled boars, and groans of bears,
  And herds of howling wolves that stun the sailors' ears.
  These from their caverns, at the close of night,
  Fill the sad isle with horror and affright.
  Darkling they mourn their fate, whom Circe's power,
  (That watched the moon, and planetary hour,)
  With words and wicked herbs, from human kind
  Had altered, and in brutal shapes confined.
  Which monsters lest the Trojans' pious host
  Should bear, or touch upon the enchanted coast,
  Propitious Neptune steered their course by night,
  With rising gales, that sped their happy flight.
  Supplied with these, they skim the sounding shore,
  And hear the swelling surges vainly roar.
  Now, when the rosy morn began to rise,
  And waved her saffron streamer through the skies,
  When Thetis blushed in purple, not her own,
  And from her face the breathing winds were blown,
  A sudden silence sate upon the sea,
  And sweeping oars, with struggling, urge their way.
    The Trojan, from the main, beheld a wood,
  Which thick with shades, and a brown horror, stood:
  Betwixt the trees the Tyber took his course,
  With whirlpools dimpled; and with downward force,
  That drove the sand along, he took his way,
  And rolled his yellow billows to the sea.
  About him, and above, and round the wood,
  The birds that haunt the borders of his flood,
  That bathed within, or basked upon his side,
  To tuneful songs their narrow throats applied.
  The captain gives command; the joyful train
  Glide through the gloomy shade, and leave the main.
    Now, Erato! thy poet's mind inspire,
  And fill his soul with thy celestial fire.
  Relate what Latium was; her ancient kings;
  Declare the past and present state of things,
  When first the Trojan fleet Ausonia sought,
  And how the rivals loved, and how they fought.
  These are my theme, and how the war began,
  And how concluded by the godlike man:
  For I shall sing of battles, blood, and rage,
  Which princes and their people did engage;
  And haughty souls, that, moved with mutual hate,
  In fighting fields pursued and found their fate;
  That roused the Tyrrhene realm with loud alarms,
  And peaceful Italy involved in arms.
  A larger scene of action is displayed;
  And, rising hence, a greater work is weighed.
    Latinus, old and mild, had long possessed
  The Latian sceptre, and his people blessed:
  His father Faunus: a Laurentian dame
  His mother; fair Marica was her name.
  But Faunus came from Picus: Picus drew
  His birth from Saturn, if records be true.
  Thus king Latinus, in the third degree,
  Had Saturn author of his family.
  But this old peaceful prince, as heaven decreed,
  Was blessed with no male issue to succeed;
  His sons in blooming youth were snatched by fate:
  One only daughter heired the royal state.
  Fired with her love, and with ambition led,
  The neighbouring princes court her nuptial bed.
  Among the crowd, but far above the rest,
  Young Turnus to the beauteous maid addressed.
  Turnus, for high descent and graceful mien,
  Was first, and favoured by the Latian queen;
  With him she strove to join Lavinia's hand;
  But dire portents the purposed match withstand.
    Deep in the palace, of long growth, there stood
  A laurel's trunk, a venerable wood;
  Where rites divine were paid; whose holy hair
  Was kept and cut with superstitious care.
  This plant Latinus, when his town he walled,
  Then found, and from the tree Laurentum called:
  And last, in honour of his new abode,
  He vowed the laurel to the laurel's god.
  It happened once, (a boding prodigy!)
  A swarm of bees, that cut the liquid sky,
  (Unknown from whence they took their airy flight,)
  Upon the topmost branch in clouds alight;
  There, with their clasping feet, together clung,
  And a long cluster from the laurel hung.
  An ancient augur prophesied from hence:--
  "Behold on Latian shores a foreign prince!
  From the same parts of heaven his navy stands,              }
  To the same parts on earth; his army lands;                 }
  The town he conquers, and the tower commands."              }
  Yet more, when fair Lavinia fed the fire
  Before the gods, and stood beside her sire,
  (Strange to relate!) the flames, involved in smoke
  Of incense, from the sacred altar broke,
  Caught her dishevelled hair, and rich attire;
  Her crown and jewels crackled in the fire:
  From thence the fuming trail began to spread,
  And lambent glories danced about her head.
  This new portent the seer with wonder views,
  Then pausing, thus his prophecy renews:--
  "The nymph, who scatters flaming fires around,
  Shall shine with honour, shall herself be crowned,
  But, caused by her irrevocable fate,
  War shall the country waste, and change the state."
  Latinus, frighted with this dire ostent,
  For counsel to his father Faunus went,
  And sought the shades renowned for prophecy,
  Which near Albunea's sulphurous fountain lie.
  To those the Latian and the Sabine land
  Fly, when distressed, and thence relief demand.
  The priest on skins of offerings takes his ease,
  And nightly visions in his slumber sees;
  A swarm of thin aërial shapes appears,
  And, fluttering round his temples, deafs his ears.
  These he consults, the future fates to know,
  From powers above, and from the fiends below.
  Here, for the god's advice, Latinus flies,
  Offering a hundred sheep for sacrifice:
  Their woolly fleeces, as the rites required,
  He laid beneath him, and to rest retired.
  No sooner were his eyes in slumber bound,
  When, from above, a more than mortal sound
  Invades his ears; and thus the vision spoke:--              }
  "Seek not, my seed, in Latian bands to yoke                 }
  Our fair Lavinia, nor the gods provoke.                     }
  A foreign son upon the shore descends,
  Whose martial fame from pole to pole extends.
  His race, in arms and arts of peace renowned,               }
  Not Latium shall contain, nor Europe bound:                 }
  'Tis theirs whate'er the sun surveys around."               }
  These answers, in the silent night received,
  The king himself divulged, the land believed:
  The fame through all the neighbouring nations flew,
  When now the Trojan navy was in view.
    Beneath a shady tree, the hero spread                     }
  His table on the turf, with cakes of bread;                 }
  And, with his chiefs, on forest fruits he fed.              }
  They sate; and (not without the god's command)
  Their homely fare dispatched, the hungry band
  Invade their trenchers next, and soon devour,
  To mend the scanty meal, their cakes of flour.
  Ascanius this observed, and, smiling, said,--
  "See! we devour the plates on which we fed."
  The speech had omen, that the Trojan race
  Should find repose, and this the time and place.
  Æneas took the word, and thus replies:
  (Confessing fate with wonder in his eyes,)
  "All hail, O earth! all hail, my household gods!
  Behold the destined place of your abodes!
  For thus Anchises prophesied of old,
  And this our fatal place of rest foretold:--
  'When, on a foreign shore, instead of meat,
  By famine forced, your trenchers you shall eat,
  Then ease your weary Trojans will attend,
  And the long labours of your voyage end.
  Remember on that happy coast to build,
  And with a trench inclose the fruitful field.'
  This was that famine, this the fatal place,
  Which ends the wandering of our exiled race.
  Then, on to-morrow's dawn, your care employ,                }
  To search the land, and where the cities lie,               }
  And what the men; but give this day to joy.                 }
  Now pour to Jove; and, after Jove is blest,
  Call great Anchises to the genial feast:
  Crown high the goblets with a cheerful draught;
  Enjoy the present hour; adjourn the future thought."
    Thus having said, the hero bound his brows
  With leafy branches, then performed his vows;
  Adoring first the genius of the place,
  Then Earth, the mother of the heavenly race,
  The nymphs, and native godheads yet unknown,
  And Night, and all the stars that gild her sable throne,
  And ancient Cybel, and Idæan Jove,
  And last his sire below, and mother queen above.
  Then heaven's high monarch thundered thrice aloud,
  And thrice he shook aloft a golden cloud.
  Soon through the joyful camp a rumour flew,
  The time was come their city to renew.
  Then every brow with cheerful green is crowned,
  The feasts are doubled, and the bowls go round.
    When next the rosy morn disclosed the day,
  The scouts to several parts divide their way,
  To learn the natives' names, their towns explore,
  The coasts, and trendings of the crooked shore:
  Here Tyber flows, and here Numicus stands;
  Here warlike Latins hold the happy lands.
  The pious chief, who sought by peaceful ways
  To found his empire, and his town to raise,
  A hundred youths from all his train selects,
  And to the Latian court their course directs,
  (The spacious palace where their prince resides)
  And all their heads with wreaths of olive hides.
  They go commissioned to require a peace,
  And carry presents to procure access.
  Thus while they speed their pace, the prince designs
  The new-elected seat, and draws the lines.
  The Trojans round the place a rampire cast,
  And palisades about the trenches placed.
    Meantime the train, proceeding on their way,
  From far the town and lofty towers survey;
  At length approach the walls. Without the gate,
  They see the boys and Latian youth debate
  The martial prizes on the dusty plain:
  Some drive the cars, and some the coursers rein;
  Some bend the stubborn bow for victory,
  And some with darts their active sinews try.
  A posting messenger, dispatched from hence,
  Of this fair troop advised their aged prince,
  That foreign men, of mighty stature, came;
  Uncouth their habit, and unknown their name.
  The king ordains their entrance, and ascends
  His regal seat, surrounded by his friends.
  The palace built by Picus, vast and proud,                  }
  Supported by a hundred pillars stood,                       }
  And round encompassed with a rising wood.                   }
  The pile o'erlooked the town, and drew the sight,
  Surprised at once with reverence and delight.
  There kings received the marks of sovereign power;          }
  In state the monarchs marched; the lictors bore             }
  Their awful axes and the rods before.                       }
  Here the tribunal stood, the house of prayer,
  And here the sacred senators repair;
  All at large tables, in long order set,
  A ram their offering, and a ram their meat.
  Above the portal, carved in cedar wood,
  Placed in their ranks, their godlike grandsires stood;
  Old Saturn, with his crooked scythe, on high;
  And Italus, that led the colony;
  And ancient Janus, with his double face,
  And bunch of keys, the porter of the place.
  There stood Sabinus, planter of the vines;                  }
  On a short pruning-hook his head reclines,                  }
  And studiously surveys his generous wines;                  }
  Then warlike kings, who for their country fought,
  And honourable wounds from battle brought.
  Around the posts, hung helmets, darts, and spears,          }
  And captive chariots, axes, shields, and bars,              }
  And broken beaks of ships, the trophies of their wars.      }
  Above the rest, as chief of all the band,                 }
  Was Picus placed, a buckler in his hand,                  }
  His other waved a long divining wand.                     }
  Girt in his Gabine gown the hero sate,
  Yet could not with his art avoid his fate:
  For Circe long had loved the youth in vain,
  Till love, refused, converted to disdain:
  Then, mixing powerful herbs, with magic art,
  She changed his form, who could not change his heart;
  Constrained him in a bird, and made him fly,
  With party-coloured plumes, a chattering pie.
  In this high temple, on a chair of state,
  The seat of audience, old Latinus sate;
  Then gave admission to the Trojan train;
  And thus, with pleasing accents, he began:--
  "Tell me, ye Trojans, for that name you own,
  Nor is your course upon our coasts unknown--
  Say what you seek, and whither were you bound;
  Were you by stress of weather cast a-ground?
  (Such dangers of the sea are often seen,
  And oft befal to miserable men,)
  Or come, your shipping in our ports to lay,
  Spent and disabled in so long a way?
  Say what you want: the Latians you shall find
  Not forced to goodness, but by will inclined;
  For, since the time of Saturn's holy reign,
  His hospitable customs we retain.
  I call to mind (but time the tale has worn)
  The Aurunci told, that Dardanus, though born
  On Latian plains, yet sought the Phrygian shore,
  And Samothracia, Samos called before.
  From Tuscan Corythum he claimed his birth;
  But after, when exempt from mortal earth,
  From thence ascended to his kindred skies,
  A god, and, as a god, augments their sacrifice."
  He said.--Ilioneus made this reply:
  "O king, of Faunus' royal family!
  Nor wintery winds to Latium forced our way,
  Nor did the stars our wandering course betray.
  Willing we sought your shores; and, hither bound,
  The port, so long desired, at length we found;
  From our sweet homes and ancient realms expelled;
  Great as the greatest that the sun beheld.
  The god began our line, who rules above;
  And, as our race, our king descends from Jove:
  And hither are we come, by his command,
  To crave admission in your happy land.
  How dire a tempest, from Mycenæ poured,
  Our plains, our temples, and our town, devoured;
  What was the waste of war, what fierce alarms
  Shook Asia's crown with European arms;
  Even such have heard, if any such there be,
  Whose earth is bounded by the frozen sea;
  And such as, born beneath the burning sky
  And sultry sun, betwixt the tropics lie.
  From that dire deluge, through the watery waste,
  (Such length of years, such various perils past,)
  At last escaped, to Latium we repair,                       }
  To beg what you without your want may spare--               }
  The common water, and the common air;                       }
  Sheds which ourselves will build, and mean abodes,
  Fit to receive and serve our banished gods.
  Nor our admission shall your realm disgrace,
  Nor length of time our gratitude efface--
  Besides what endless honour you shall gain,
  To save and shelter Troy's unhappy train.
  Now, by my sovereign, and his fate, I swear--
  Renowned for faith in peace, for force in war--
  Oft our alliance other lands desired,
  And, what we seek of you, of us required.
  Despise not then, that in our hands we bear
  These holy boughs, and sue with words of prayer.
  Fate and the gods, by their supreme command,
  Have doomed our ships to seek the Latian land.
  To these abodes our fleet Apollo sends;
  Here Dardanus was born, and hither tends;
  Where Tuscan Tyber rolls with rapid force,
  And where Numicus opes his holy source.
  Besides, our prince presents, with his request,
  Some small remains of what his sire possessed.
  This golden charger, snatched from burning Troy,
  Anchises did in sacrifice employ:
  This royal robe and this tiara wore
  Old Priam, and this golden sceptre bore,
  In full assemblies, and in solemn games;
  These purple vests were weaved by Dardan dames."
    Thus while he spoke, Latinus rolled around
  His eyes, and fixed a while upon the ground.
  Intent he seemed, and anxious in his breast;
  Not by the sceptre moved, or kingly vest,
  But pondering future things of wonderous weight--
  Succession, empire, and his daughter's fate.
  On these he mused within his thoughtful mind,
  And then revolved what Faunus had divined.
  This was the foreign prince, by fate decreed
  To share his sceptre, and Lavinia's bed;
  This was the race, that sure portents foreshew
  To sway the world, and land and sea subdue.
  At length he raised his cheerful head, and spoke:--
  "The powers," said he, "the powers we both invoke,
  To you, and yours, and mine, propitious be,
  And firm our purpose with their augury!
  Have what you ask; your presents I receive;
  Land, where and when you please, with ample leave;
  Partake and use my kingdom as your own;
  All shall be yours, while I command the crown.
  And, if my wished alliance please your king,
  Tell him he should not send the peace, but bring:
  Then let him not a friend's embraces fear;
  The peace is made when I behold him here.
  Besides this answer, tell my royal guest,
  I add to his commands my own request:
  Only one daughter heirs my crown and state,
  Whom not our oracles, nor heaven, nor fate,
  Nor frequent prodigies, permit to join
  With any native of the Ausonian line.
  A foreign son-in-law shall come from far,
  (Such is our doom,) a chief renowned in war,
  Whose race shall bear aloft the Latian name,
  And through the conquered world diffuse our fame.
  Himself to be the man the fates require,
  I firmly judge, and, what I judge, desire."
  He said, and then on each bestowed a steed.
  Three hundred horses, in high stables fed,
  Stood ready, shining all, and smoothly dressed:
  Of these he chose the fairest and the best,
  To mount the Trojan troop. At his command,
  The steeds caparisoned with purple stand,
  With golden trappings, glorious to behold,
  And champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold.
  Then to his absent guest the king decreed
  A pair of coursers born of heavenly breed,
  Who from their nostrils breathed etherial fire;
  Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
  By substituting mares produced on earth,
  Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth.
  These draw the chariot which Latinus sends,
  And the rich present to the prince commends.
  Sublime on stately steeds the Trojans borne,
  To their expecting lord with peace return.
    But jealous Juno, from Pachynus' height,                  }
  As she from Argos took her airy flight,                     }
  Beheld, with envious eyes, this hateful sight.              }
  She saw the Trojan, and his joyful train,
  Descend upon the shore, desert the main,
  Design a town, and, with unhoped success,
  The embassadors return with promised peace.
  Then, pierced with pain, she shook her haughty head,
  Sighed from her inward soul, and thus she said:--
  "O hated offspring of my Phrygian foes!
  O fates of Troy, which Juno's fates oppose!
  Could they not fall unpitied on the plain,
  But slain revive, and taken 'scape again?
  When execrable Troy in ashes lay,
  Through fires and swords and seas they forced their way.
  Then vanquished Juno must in vain contend,--
  Her rage disarmed, her empire at an end!
  Breathless and tired, is all my fury spent?
  Or does my glutted spleen at length relent?
  As if 'twere little from their town to chase,
  I through the seas pursued their exiled race;
  Engaged the heavens, opposed the stormy main;
  But billows roared, and tempests raged in vain.
  What have my Scyllas and my Syrtes done,
  When these they overpass, and those they shun?
  On Tyber's shores they land, secure of fate,
  Triumphant o'er the storms and Juno's hate!
  Mars could in mutual blood the Centaurs bathe,
  And Jove himself gave way to Cynthia's wrath,
  Who sent the tusky boar to Calydon;
  (What great offence had either people done?)
  But I, the consort of the Thunderer,
  Have waged a long and unsuccessful war,
  With various arts and arms in vain have toiled,
  And by a mortal man at length am foiled!
  If native power prevail not, shall I doubt
  To seek for needful succour from without?
  If Jove and heaven my just desires deny,
  Hell shall the power of heaven and Jove supply.
  Grant that the Fates have firmed, by their decree,
  The Trojan race to reign in Italy:
  At least I can defer the nuptial day,
  And, with protracted wars, the peace delay:
  With blood the dear alliance shall be bought,
  And both the people near destruction brought;
  So shall the son-in-law and father join,
  With ruin, war, and waste of either line.
  O fatal maid! thy marriage is endowed
  With Phrygian, Latian, and Rutulian blood!
  Bellona leads thee to thy lover's hand;                     }
  Another queen brings forth another brand,                   }
  To burn with foreign fires another land!                    }
  A second Paris, differing but in name,
  Shall fire his country with a second flame."
    Thus having said, she sinks beneath the ground,
  With furious haste, and shoots the Stygian sound,
  To rouse Alecto from the infernal seat
  Of her dire sisters, and their dark retreat.
  This Fury, fit for her intent, she chose;
  One who delights in wars, and human woes.
  Even Pluto hates his own mis-shapen race;
  Her sister Furies fly her hideous face;
  So frightful are the forms the monster takes,
  So fierce the hissings of her speckled snakes.
  Her Juno finds, and thus inflames her spite:--
  "O virgin daughter of eternal Night,
  Give me this once thy labour, to sustain
  My right, and execute my just disdain.
  Let not the Trojans, with a feigned pretence
  Of proffered peace, delude the Latian prince.
  Expel from Italy that odious name,
  And let not Juno suffer in her fame.
  'Tis thine to ruin realms, o'erturn a state,                }
  Betwixt the dearest friends to raise debate,                }
  And kindle kindred blood to mutual hate.                    }
  Thy hand o'er towns the funeral torch displays,
  And forms a thousand ills ten thousand ways.
  Now shake, from out thy fruitful breast, the seeds
  Of envy, discord, and of cruel deeds:
  Confound the peace established, and prepare
  Their souls to hatred, and their hands to war."
  Smeared as she was with black Gorgonean blood,
  The Fury sprang above the Stygian flood;
  And on her wicker wings, sublime through night,
  She to the Latian palace took her flight:
  There sought the queen's apartment, stood before
  The peaceful threshold, and besieged the door.
  Restless Amata lay, her swelling breast                     }
  Fired with disdain for Turnus dispossessed,                 }
  And the new nuptials of the Trojan guest.                   }
  From her black bloody locks the Fury shakes
  Her darling plague, the favourite of her snakes:
  With her full force she threw the poisonous dart,
  And fixed it deep within Amata's heart,
  That, thus envenomed, she might kindle rage,
  And sacrifice to strife her house and husband's age,
  Unseen, unfelt, the fiery serpent skims
  Betwixt her linen and her naked limbs,
  His baleful breath inspiring as he glides.
  Now like a chain around her neck he rides,
  Now like a fillet to her head repairs,
  And with his circling volumes folds her hairs.
  At first the silent venom slid with ease,
  And seized her cooler senses by degrees;
  Then, ere the infected mass was fired too far,
  In plaintive accents she began the war,
  And thus bespoke her husband:--"Shall," she said,
  "A wandering prince enjoy Lavinia's bed?
  If nature plead not in a parent's heart,
  Pity my tears, and pity her desert.
  I know, my dearest lord, the time will come,
  You would, in vain, reverse your cruel doom:
  The faithless pirate soon will set to sea,
  And bear the royal virgin far away!
  A guest like him, a Trojan guest before,                    }
  In shew of friendship sought the Spartan shore,             }
  And ravished Helen from her husband bore.                   }
  Think on a king's inviolable word;
  And think on Turnus, her once plighted lord.
  To this false foreigner you give your throne,
  And wrong a friend, a kinsman, and a son.
  Resume your ancient care; and, if the god
  Your sire, and you, resolve on foreign blood,
  Know all are foreign, in a larger sense,
  Not born your subjects, or derived from hence.
  Then, if the line of Turnus you retrace,
  He springs from Inachus of Argive race."
  But, when she saw her reasons idly spent,
  And could not move him from his fixed intent,
  She flew to rage; for now the snake possessed
  Her vital parts, and poisoned all her breast.
  She raves, she runs with a distracted pace,
  And fills, with horrid howls, the public place.
  And, as young striplings whip the top for sport,
  On the smooth pavement of an empty court;
  The wooden engine flies and whirls about,
  Admired, with clamours, of the beardless rout;
  They lash aloud; each other they provoke,
  And lend their little souls at every stroke:
  Thus fares the queen; and thus her fury blows
  Amidst the crowd, and kindles as she goes.
  Nor yet content, she strains her malice more,
  And adds new ills to those contrived before:
  She flies the town, and, mixing with a throng
  Of madding matrons, bears the bride along,
  Wandering through woods and wilds, and devious ways,
  And with these arts the Trojan match delays.
  She feigned the rites of Bacchus; cried aloud,
  And to the buxom god the virgin vowed.
  "Evæ! O Bacchus!" thus began the song;
  And "Evæ!"[115] answered all the female throng.
  "O virgin worthy thee alone!" she cried;
  "O worthy thee alone!" the crew replied.
  "For thee she feeds her hair, she leads thy dance,
  And with thy winding ivy wreaths her lance."
  Like fury seized the rest: the progress known,
  All seek the mountains, and forsake the town:
  All, clad in skins of beasts, the javelin bear,             }
  Give to the wanton winds their flowing hair,                }
  And shrieks and shoutings rend the suffering air.           }
  The queen herself, inspired with rage divine,
  Shook high above her head a flaming pine,
  Then rolled her hagard eyes around the throng,
  And sung, in Turnus' name, the nuptial song:--
  "Iö! ye Latian dames, if any here
  Hold your unhappy queen, Amata, dear;
  If there be here," she said, "who dare maintain
  My right, nor think the name of mother vain;
  Unbind your fillets, loose your flowing hair,
  And orgies and nocturnal rites prepare."
  Amata's breast the Fury thus invades,
  And fires with rage, amid the sylvan shades.
  Then, when she found her venom spread so far,
  The royal house embroiled in civil war,
  Raised on her dusky wings, she cleaves the skies,
  And seeks the palace where young Turnus lies.
  His town, as Fame reports, was built of old
  By Danaë, pregnant with almighty gold,
  Who fled her father's rage, and, with a train               }
  Of following Argives, through the stormy main,              }
  Driven by the southern blasts, was fated here to reign.     }
    'Twas Ardua once: now Ardea's name it bears;
  Once a fair city, now consumed with years;
  Here, in his lofty palace, Turnus lay,
  Betwixt the confines of the night and day,
  Secure in sleep.--The Fury laid aside                       }
  Her looks and limbs, and with new methods tried             }
  The foulness of the infernal form to hide.                  }
  Propped on a staff, she takes a trembling mien:
  Her face is furrowed, and her front obscene;
  Deep-dinted wrinkles on her cheek she draws;
  Sunk are her eyes, and toothless are her jaws;
  Her hoary hair with holy fillets bound,
  Her temples with an olive wreath are crowned.
  Old Chalybe, who kept the sacred fane                       }
  Of Juno, now she seemed, and thus began,                    }
  Appearing in a dream, to rouse the careless man:--          }
  "Shall Turnus then such endless toil sustain
  In fighting fields, and conquer towns in vain?
  Win, for a Trojan head to wear the prize,
  Usurp thy crown, enjoy thy victories?
  The bride and sceptre, which thy blood has bought,
  The king transfers; and foreign heirs are sought.
  Go now, deluded man, and seek again
  New toils, new dangers, on the dusty plain!
  Repel the Tuscan foes; their city seize;
  Protect the Latians in luxurious ease!
  This dream all-powerful Juno sends; I bear
  Her mighty mandates, and her words you hear.
  Haste! arm your Ardeans; issue to the plain;
  With faith to friend, assault the Trojan train:
  Their thoughtless chiefs, their painted ships, that lie
  In Tyber's mouth, with fire and sword destroy.
  The Latian king, unless he shall submit,
  Own his old promise, and his new forget--
  Let him, in arms, the power of Turnus prove,
  And learn to fear whom he disdains to love.
  For such is heaven's command."--The youthful prince
  With scorn replied, and made this bold defence:--
  "You tell me, mother, what I knew before,
  The Phrygian fleet is landed on the shore.
  I neither fear nor will provoke the war;
  My fate is Juno's most peculiar care.
  But time has made you dote, and vainly tell
  Of arms, imagined in your lonely cell.
  Go! be the temple and the gods your care;
  Permit to men the thought of peace and war."
    These haughty words Alecto's rage provoke,
  And frighted Turnus trembled as she spoke.
  Her eyes grow stiffened, and with sulphur burn;
  Her hideous looks and hellish form return;
  Her curling snakes with hissings fill the place,
  And open all the furies of her face:
  Then, darting fire from her malignant eyes,                 }
  She cast him backward as he strove to rise,                 }
  And, lingering, sought to frame some new replies.           }
  High on her head she rears two twisted snakes;            }
  Her chains she rattles, and her whip she shakes;          }
  And, churning bloody foam, thus loudly speaks:--          }
  "Behold whom time has made to dote, and tell
  Of arms, imagined in her lonely cell!
  Behold the Fates' infernal minister!
  War, death, destruction, in my hand I bear."
    Thus having said, her smouldering torch, impressed
  With her full force, she plunged into his breast.
  Aghast he waked; and, starting from his bed,
  Cold sweat, in clammy drops, his limbs o'erspread.--
  "Arms! arms!" he cries: "my sword and shield prepare!"
  He breathes defiance, blood, and mortal war.
  So, when with crackling flames a cauldron fries,
  The bubbling waters from the bottom rise:
  Above the brims they force their fiery way;
  Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.
    The peace polluted thus, a chosen band
  He first commissions to the Latian land,
  In threatening embassy; then raised the rest,
  To meet in arms the intruding Trojan guest,
  To force the foes from the Lavinian shore,
  And Italy's endangered peace restore.
  Himself alone an equal match he boasts,
  To fight the Phrygian and Ausonian hosts.
  The gods invoked, the Rutuli prepare
  Their arms, and warm each other to the war.
  His beauty these, and those his blooming age,
  The rest his house and his own fame engage.
    While Turnus urges thus his enterprize,
  The Stygian Fury to the Trojans flies;
  New frauds invents, and takes a steepy stand,
  Which overlooks the vale with wide command;
  Where fair Ascanius and his youthful train,                 }
  With horns and hounds, a hunting match ordain,              }
  And pitch their toils around the shady plain.               }
  The Fury fires the pack; they snuff, they vent,
  And feed their hungry nostrils with the scent.
  'Twas of a well grown stag, whose antlers rise
  High o'er his front, his beams invade the skies.
  From this light cause, the infernal maid prepares
  The country churls to mischief, hate, and wars.
    The stately beast the two Tyrrhidæ bred,
  Snatched from his dam, and the tame youngling fed.
  Their father Tyrrheus did his fodder bring,
  Tyrrheus, chief ranger to the Latian king:
  Their sister Silvia cherished with her care
  The little wanton, and did wreaths prepare
  To hang his budding horns, with ribbons tied
  His tender neck, and combed his silken hide,
  And bathed his body. Patient of command
  In time he grew, and, growing used to hand,
  He waited at his master's board for food;
  Then sought his savage kindred in the wood,
  Where grazing all the day, at night he came
  To his known lodgings, and his country dame.
  This household beast, that used the woodland grounds,
  Was viewed at first by the young hero's hounds,
  As down the stream he swam, to seek retreat
  In the cool waters, and to quench his heat.
  Ascanius, young, and eager of his game,
  Soon bent his bow, uncertain in his aim:
  But the dire fiend the fatal arrow guides,
  Which pierced his bowels through his panting sides.
  The bleeding creature issues from the floods,               }
  Possessed with fear, and seeks his known abodes,            }
  His old familiar hearth, and household gods.                }
  He falls; he fills the house with heavy groans,
  Implores their pity, and his pain bemoans.
  Young Silvia beats her breast, and cries aloud
  For succour from the clownish neighbourhood:
  The churls assemble; for the fiend, who lay
  In the close woody covert, urged their way.
  One with a brand yet burning from the flame,
  Armed with a knotty club another came:
  Whate'er they catch or find, without their care,
  Their fury makes an instrument of war.
  Tyrrheus, the foster-father of the beast,
  Then clenched a hatchet in his horny fist,
  But held his hand from the descending stroke,               }
  And left his wedge within the cloven oak,                   }
  To whet their courage, and their rage provoke.              }
  And now the goddess, exercised in ill,
  Who watched an hour to work her impious will,
  Ascends the roof, and to her crooked horn,
  Such as was then by Latian shepherds borne,
  Adds all her breath. The rocks and woods around,
  And mountains, tremble at the infernal sound.
  The sacred lake of Trivia from afar,                        }
  The Veline fountains, and sulphureous Nar,                  }
  Shake at the baleful blast, the signal of the war.          }
  Young mothers wildly stare, with fear possessed,
  And strain their helpless infants to their breast.
    The clowns, a boisterous, rude, ungoverned crew,
  With furious haste to the loud summons flew.
  The powers of Troy, then issuing on the plain,
  With fresh recruits their youthful chief sustain:
  Not theirs a raw and unexperienced train,
  But a firm body of embattled men.
  At first, while fortune favoured neither side,
  The fight with clubs and burning brands was tried:
  But now, both parties reinforced, the fields
  Are bright with flaming swords and brazen shields.
  A shining harvest either host displays,
  And shoots against the sun with equal rays.
    Thus, when a black-browed gust begins to rise,            }
  White foam at first on the curled ocean fries;              }
  Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies;           }
  Till, by the fury of the storm full blown,
  The muddy bottom o'er the clouds is thrown.
    First Almon falls, old Tyrrheus' eldest care,
  Pierced with an arrow from the distant war:
  Fixed in his throat the flying weapon stood,
  And stopped his breath, and drank his vital blood.
  Huge heaps of slain around the body rise:
  Among the rest, the rich Galesus lies;
  A good old man, while peace he preached in vain,
  Amidst the madness of the unruly train:
  Five herds, five bleating flocks, his pastures filled;
  His lands a hundred yoke of oxen tilled.
  Thus, while in equal scales their fortune stood,
  The Fury bathed them in each other's blood;
  Then, having fixed the fight, exulting flies,
  And bears fulfilled her promise to the skies.
  To Juno thus she speaks:--"Behold! 'tis done,
  The blood already drawn, the war begun;
  The discord is complete; nor can they cease
  The dire debate, nor you command the peace.
  Now, since the Latian and the Trojan brood
  Have tasted vengeance, and the sweets of blood;
  Speak, and my power shall add this office more:
  The neighbouring nations of the Ausonian shore
  Shall hear the dreadful rumour, from afar,
  Of armed invasion, and embrace the war."
  Then Juno thus:--"The grateful work is done,
  The seeds of discord sowed, the war begun:
  Frauds, fears, and fury, have possessed the state,
  And fixed the causes of a lasting hate.
  A bloody Hymen shall the alliance join
  Betwixt the Trojan and Ausonian line:
  But thou with speed to night and hell repair;               }
  For not the gods, nor angry Jove, will bear                 }
  Thy lawless wandering walks in upper air.                   }
  Leave what remains to me." Saturnia said:                 }
  The sullen fiend her sounding wings displayed,            }
  Unwilling left the light, and sought the nether shade.    }
    In midst of Italy, well known to fame,
  There lies a lake (Amsanctus is the name)
  Below the lofty mounts: on either side
  Thick forests the forbidden entrance hide.
  Full in the centre of the sacred wood,
  An arm arises of the Stygian flood,
  Which, breaking from beneath with bellowing sound,
  Whirls the black waves and rattling stones around.
  Here Pluto pants for breath from out his cell,
  And opens wide the grinning jaws of hell.
  To this infernal lake the Fury flies;
  Here hides her hated head, and frees the labouring skies.
    Saturnian Juno now, with double care,
  Attends the fatal process of the war.
  The clowns, returned from battle, bear the slain,
  Implore the gods, and to their king complain.
  The corpse of Almon, and the rest, are shown:
  Shrieks, clamours, murmurs, fill the frighted town.
  Ambitious Turnus in the press appears,
  And, aggravating crimes, augments their fears;
  Proclaims his private injuries aloud,                       }
  A solemn promise made, and disavowed;                       }
  A foreign son is sought, and a mixed mongrel brood.         }
  Then they, whose mothers, frantic with their fear,        }
  In woods and wilds the flags of Bacchus bear,             }
  And lead his dances with dishevelled hair,                }
  Increase the clamour, and the war demand,
  (Such was Amata's interest in the land,)
  Against the public sanctions of the peace,
  Against all omens of their ill success.
  With fates averse, the rout in arms resort,
  To force their monarch, and insult the court.
  But, like a rock unmoved, a rock that braves
  The raging tempest and the rising waves--
  Propped on himself he stands; his solid sides
  Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides--
  So stood the pious prince unmoved, and long
  Sustained the madness of the noisy throng.
  But, when he found that Juno's power prevailed,
  And all the methods of cool counsel failed,
  He calls the gods to witness their offence,
  Disclaims the war, asserts his innocence.
  "Hurried by fate," he cries, "and borne before
  A furious wind, we leave the faithful shore!
  O more than madmen! you yourselves shall bear
  The guilt of blood and sacrilegious war:
  Thou, Turnus, shalt atone it by thy fate,
  And pray to heaven for peace, but pray too late.
  For me, my stormy voyage at an end,
  I to the port of death securely tend.
  The funeral pomp which to your kings you pay,
  Is all I want, and all you take away."
  He said no more, but, in his walls confined,
  Shut out the woes which he too well divined;
  Nor with the rising storm would vainly strive,
  But left the helm, and let the vessel drive.
    A solemn custom was observed of old,
  Which Latium held, and now the Romans hold,
  Their standard when in fighting fields they rear            }
  Against the fierce Hyrcanians, or declare                   }
  The Scythian, Indian, or Arabian war--                      }
  Or from the boasting Parthians would regain
  Their eagles, lost in Carræ's bloody plain.
  Two gates of steel (the name of Mars they bear,
  And still are worshipped with religious fear)
  Before his temple stand: the dire abode,
  And the feared issues of the furious god,
  Are fenced with brazen bolts; without the gates,
  The wary guardian Janus doubly waits
  Then, when the sacred senate votes the wars,                }
  The Roman consul their decree declares,                     }
  And in his robes the sounding gates unbars.                 }
  The youth in military shouts arise,
  And the loud trumpets break the yielding skies.
  These rites, of old by sovereign princes used,
  Were the king's office: but the king refused,
  Deaf to their cries, nor would the gates unbar
  Of sacred peace, or loose the imprisoned war;
  But hid his head, and, safe from loud alarms,
  Abhorred the wicked ministry of arms.
  Then heaven's imperious queen shot down from high;
  At her approach the brazen hinges fly;
  The gates are forced, and every falling bar;
  And, like a tempest, issues out the war.
  The peaceful cities of the Ausonian shore,
  Lulled in their ease, and undisturbed before,
  Are all on fire; and some, with studious care,
  Their restive steeds in sandy plains prepare;
  Some their soft limbs in painful marches try,
  And war is all their wish, and arms the general cry.
  Part scour their rusty shields with seam; and part
  New grind the blunted axe, and point the dart:
  With joy they view the waving ensigns fly,
  And hear the trumpet's clangor pierce the sky.
  Five cities forge their arms--the Atinian powers,
  Antemne, Tibur with her lofty towers,
  Ardea the proud, the Crustumerian town:
  All these of old were places of renown.
  Some hammer helmets for the fighting field;
  Some twine young sallows to support the shield;
  The corselet some, and some the cuishes mould,
  With silver plated, and with ductile gold.
  The rustic honours of the scythe and share
  Give place to swords and plumes, the pride of war.
  Old faulchions are new tempered in the fires:
  The sounding trumpet every soul inspires.
  The word is given; with eager speed they lace
  The shining head-piece, and the shield embrace.
  The neighing steeds are to the chariots tied;
  The trusty weapon sits on every side.
    And, now the mighty labour is begun,
  Ye Muses, open all your Helicon.
  Sing you the chiefs that swayed the Ausonian land,
  Their arms, and armies under their command;
  What warriors in our ancient clime were bred;
  What soldiers followed, and what heroes led.
  For well you know, and can record alone,
  What fame to future times conveys but darkly down.
    Mezentius first appeared upon the plain:
  Scorn sate upon his brows, and sour disdain,
  Defying earth and heaven. Etruria lost,
  He brings to Turnus' aid his baffled host.
  The charming Lausus, full of youthful fire,
  Rode in the rank, and next his sullen sire;
  To Turnus only second in the grace
  Of manly mien, and features of the face.
  A skilful horseman, and a huntsman bred,
  With fates averse a thousand men he led:
  His sire unworthy of so brave a son;
  Himself well worthy of a happier throne.
    Next Aventinus drives his chariot round
  The Latian plains, with palms and laurels crowned.
  Proud of his steeds, he smokes along the field;
  His father's hydra fills his ample shield:
  A hundred serpents hiss about the brims;                    }
  The son of Hercules he justly seems,                        }
  By his broad shoulders and gigantic limbs--                 }
  Of heavenly part, and part of earthly blood,
  A mortal woman mixing with a god.
  For strong Alcides, after he had slain
  The triple Geryon, drove from conquered Spain
  His captive herds; and, thence in triumph led,
  On Tuscan Tyber's flowery banks they fed.
  Then, on mount Aventine, the son of Jove
  The priestess Rhea found, and forced to love.
    For arms, his men long piles and javelins bore;
  And poles with pointed steel their foes in battle gore.
  Like Hercules himself, his son appears
  In savage pomp; a lion's hide he wears;
  About his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin;
  The teeth and gaping jaws severely grin.
  Thus, like the god his father, homely drest,
  He strides into the hall, a horrid guest.
  Then two twin-brothers from fair Tibur came,
  (Which from their brother Tiburs took the name,)
  Fierce Coras and Catillus, void of fear:
  Armed Argive horse they led, and in the front appear,
  Like cloud-born Centaurs, from the mountain's height
  With rapid course descending to the fight;
  They rush along, the rattling woods give way;
  The branches bend before their sweepy sway.
    Nor was Præneste's founder wanting there,
  Whom fame reports the son of Mulciber:
  Found in the fire, and fostered in the plains,              }
  A shepherd and a king at once he reigns,                    }
  And leads to Turnus' aid his country swains.                }
  His own Præneste sends a chosen band,
  With those who plough Saturnia's Gabine land;
  Besides the succour which cold Anien yields,
  The rocks of Hernicus, and dewy fields,
  Anagnia fat, and father Amasene--
  A numerous rout, but all of naked men:
  Nor arms they wear, nor swords and bucklers wield,
  Nor drive the chariot through the dusty field,
  But whirl from leathern slings huge balls of lead,
  And spoils of yellow wolves adorn their head;
  The left foot naked, when they march to fight,
  But in a bull's raw hide they sheath the right.
    Messapus next, (great Neptune was his sire,)
  Secure of steel, and fated from the fire,
  In pomp appears, and with his ardour warms
  A heartless train, unexercised in arms:
  The just Faliscans he to battle brings,
  And those who live where lake Ciminius springs;
  And where Feronia's grove and temple stands,
  Who till Fescennian or Flavinian lands:
  All these in order march, and marching sing
  The warlike actions of their sea-born king;
  Like a long team of snowy swans on high,
  Which clap their wings, and cleave the liquid sky,
  When, homeward from their watery pastures borne,
  They sing, and Asia's lakes their notes return.
  Not one, who heard their music from afar,
  Would think these troops an army trained to war,
  But flocks of fowl, that, when the tempests roar,
  With their hoarse gabbling seek the silent shore.
    Then Clausus came, who led a numerous band
  Of troops embodied from the Sabine land,
  And, in himself alone, an army brought.
  'Twas he the noble Claudian race begot,
  The Claudian race, ordained, in times to come,
  To share the greatness of imperial Rome.
  He led the Cures forth of old renown,
  Mutuscans from their olive-bearing town,
  And all the Eretian powers; besides a band
  That followed from Velinum's dewy land,
  And Amiternian troops, of mighty fame,
  And mountaineers, that from Severus came,
  And from the craggy cliffs of Tetrica,                      }
  And those where yellow Tyber takes his way,                 }
  And where Himella's wanton waters play.                     }
  Casperia sends her arms, with those that lie
  By Fabaris, and fruitful Foruli:
  The warlike aids of Horta next appear,
  And the cold Nursians come to close the rear,
  Mixed with the natives born of Latine blood,
  Whom Allia washes with her fatal flood.
  Not thicker billows beat the Libyan main,
  When pale Orion sets in wintery rain,
  Nor thicker harvests on rich Hermus rise,
  Or Lycian fields, when Phœbus burns the skies,
  Than stand these troops: their bucklers ring around;
  Their trampling turns the turf, and shakes the solid ground.
    High in his chariot then Halesus came,
  A foe by birth to Troy's unhappy name:
  From Agamemnon born--to Turnus' aid,
  A thousand men the youthful hero led,
  Who till the Massic soil, for wine renowned,
  And fierce Auruncans from their hilly ground,
  And those who live by Sidicinian shores,
  And where with shoaly fords Vulturnus roars,
  Cales' and Osca's old inhabitants,
  And rough Saticulans, inured to wants.
  Light demi-lances from afar they throw,
  Fastened with leathern thongs, to gall the foe.
  Short crooked swords in closer fight they wear,
  And on their warding arm light bucklers bear.
    Nor, Œbalus, shalt thou be left unsung,
  From nymph Sebethis and old Telon sprung,
  Who then in Teleboan Capri reigned;
  But that short isle the ambitious youth disdained,
  And o'er Campania stretched his ample sway,
  Where swelling Sarnus seeks the Tyrrhene sea--
  O'er Batulum, and where Abella sees,
  From her high towers, the harvest of her trees.[116]
  And these (as was the Teuton use of old)
  Wield brazen swords, and brazen bucklers hold;
  Sling weighty stones when from afar they fight;
  Their casques are cork, a covering thick and light.
    Next these in rank, the warlike Ufens went,
  And led the mountain troops that Nursia sent.
  The rude Æquiculæ his rule obeyed;
  Hunting their sport, and plundering was their trade.
  In arms they ploughed, to battle still prepared:
  Their soil was barren, and their hearts were hard.
    Umbro the priest the proud Marrubians led,                }
  By king Archippus sent to Turnus' aid,                      }
  And peaceful olives crowned his hoary head.                 }
  His wand and holy words, the viper's rage,
  And venomed wounds of serpents, could assuage.
  He, when he pleased with powerful juice to steep
  Their temples, shut their eyes in pleasing sleep.
  But vain were Marsian herbs, and magic art,
  To cure the wound given by the Dardan dart.
  Yet his untimely fate the Angitian woods
  In sighs remurmured to the Fucine floods.
  The son of famed Hippolytus was there,
  Famed as his sire, and, as his mother, fair;
  Whom in Egerian groves Aricia bore,
  And nursed his youth along the marshy shore,
  Where great Diana's peaceful altars flame,
  In fruitful fields; and Virbius was his name.
  Hippolytus, as old records have said,
  Was by his stepdame sought to share her bed:
  But, when no female arts his mind could move,
  She turned to furious hate her impious love.
  Torn by wild horses on the sandy shore,                     }
  Another's crimes the unhappy hunter bore,                   }
  Glutting his father's eyes with guiltless gore.             }
  But chaste Diana, who his death deplored,
  With Æsculapian herbs his life restored:
  When Jove, who saw from high, with just disdain,
  The dead inspired with vital breath again,
  Struck to the centre, with his flaming dart,
  The unhappy founder of the godlike art.
  But Trivia kept in secret shades alone,
  Her care, Hippolytus, to fate unknown;
  And called him Virbius in the Egerian grove,
  Where then he lived obscure, but safe from Jove.
  For this, from Trivia's temple and her wood,                }
  Are coursers driven, who shed their master's blood,         }
  Affrighted by the monsters of the flood.                    }
  His son, the second Virbius, yet retained
  His father's art; and warrior steeds he reined.
    Amid the troops, and like the leading god,
  High o'er the rest in arms, the graceful Turnus rode:
  A triple pile of plumes his crest adorned,
  On which with belching flames Chimæra burned:
  The more the kindled combat rises higher,
  The more with fury burns the blazing fire.
  Fair Iö graced his shield; but Iö now
  With horns exalted stands, and seems to low--
  A noble charge! Her keeper by her side,
  To watch her walks, his hundred eyes applied;
  And on the brims her sire, the watery god,
  Rolled from his silver urn his crystal flood.
  A cloud of foot succeeds, and fills the fields
  With swords, and pointed spears, and clattering shields;
  Of Argive, and of old Sicanian bands,
  And those who plough the rich Rutulian lands;
  Auruncan youth, and those Sacrana yields,
  And the proud Labicans, with painted shields,
  And those who near Numician streams reside,                 }
  And those whom Tyber's holy forests hide,                   }
  Or Circe's hills from the main land divide;                 }
  Where Ufens glides along the lowly lands,
  Or the black water of Pomptina stands.
    Last from the Volscians fair Camilla came,
  And led her warlike troops, a warrior dame:
  Unbred to spinning, in the loom unskilled,
  She chose the nobler Pallas of the field.
  Mixed with the first, the fierce virago fought,
  Sustained the toils of arms, the danger sought,
  Outstripped the winds in speed upon the plain,
  Flew o'er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain:
  She swept the seas, and, as she skimmed along,
  Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung.
  Men, boys, and women, stupid with surprise,
  Where'er she passes, fix their wondering eyes:
  Longing they look, and gaping at the sight,
  Devour her o'er and o'er with vast delight;
  Her purple habit sits with such a grace
  On her smooth shoulders, and so suits her face;
  Her head with ringlets of her hair is crowned,
  And in a golden caul the curls are bound.
  She shakes her myrtle javelin; and, behind,
  Her Lycian quiver dances in the wind.


FOOTNOTES:

[115] Dr Carey substitutes the more sonorous ejaculation,
_Euoi!_

[116] Note III.




NOTES ON ÆNEÏS, BOOK VII.


Note I.

  _Strange to relate! the flames, involved in smoke_, &c.--P. 432.

Virgil, in this place, takes notice of a great secret in the Roman
divination: the lambent fires, which rose above the head, or played
about it, were signs of prosperity; such were those which he observed
in the second Æneïd, which were seen mounting from the crown of
Ascanius--

  _Ecce, levis summo de vertice visus Iüli
  Fundere lumen apex_.

Smoky flames (or involved in smoke) were of a mixed omen: such were
those which are here described; for smoke signifies tears, because it
produces them, and flames happiness. And therefore Virgil says, that
this ostent was not only _mirabile visu_, but _horrendum_.


Note II.

  _Only one daughter heirs my crown and state._--P. 439.

This has seemed to some an odd passage; that a king should offer his
daughter and heir to a stranger prince, and a wanderer, before he had
seen him, and when he had only heard of his arrival on his coasts. But
these critics have not well considered the simplicity of former times,
when the heroines almost courted the marriage of illustrious men. Yet
Virgil here observes the rule of decency: Lavinia offers not herself;
it is Latinus, who propounds the match; and he had been foretold, both
by an augur and an oracle, that he should have a foreign son-in-law,
who was also a hero;--fathers, in those ancient ages, considering birth
and virtue, more than fortune, in the placing of their daughters;
which I could prove by various examples; the contrary of which being
now practised, I dare not say in our nation, but in France, has not a
little darkened the lustre of their nobility. That Lavinia was averse
to this marriage, and for what reason, I shall prove in its proper
place.


Note III.

  --------_And where Abella sees,
  From her high towers, the harvest of her trees._--P. 458.

I observe that Virgil names not Nola, which was not far distant from
Abella; perhaps, because that city (the same in which Augustus died
afterwards) had once refused to give him entertainment, if we may
believe the author of his life. Homer heartily curses another city
which had used him in the same manner; but our author thought his
silence of the Nolans a sufficient correction. When a poet passes by a
place or person, though a fair occasion offers of remembering them, it
is a sign he is, or thinks himself, much disobliged.


END OF THE FOURTEENTH VOLUME.


EDINBURGH,

Printed by James Ballantyne & Co.




Transcriber's notes:

  -- Text in italics marked as _..._



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF JOHN DRYDEN, NOW FIRST
COLLECTED IN EIGHTEEN VOLUMES. VOLUME 14 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
